90+ Most Common SQL Interview Questions You Need to Know
Ruiying Li
Written by
Ruiying Li
Jaya Muvania
Edited by
Jaya Muvania
Kaivan Dave
Reviewed by
Kaivan Dave
Updated on
Jul 27, 2025
Read time
30 min read
Preparing for an SQL interview can be daunting, but having a solid grasp of common questions and their answers can make all the difference. In this article, we’ve compiled 90+ essential SQL interview questions and answers to help you ace your next interview with confidence. Whether you're a beginner or an experienced professional, these questions will cover the key concepts you need to know.

What are SQL interview questions?
SQL interview questions are designed to assess a candidate's knowledge and proficiency in Structured Query Language (SQL). These questions typically cover a range of topics, including database design, data manipulation, and query optimization, to evaluate the candidate's ability to work with relational databases effectively.

Why do interviewers ask SQL questions?
The main purpose of SQL interview questions is to evaluate a candidate's ability to manage and manipulate data within relational databases. Interviewers ask these questions to gauge the candidate's technical skills, problem-solving abilities, and understanding of database concepts, ensuring they can effectively handle real-world data challenges.

91 SQL Interview Questions
What is SQL and how does it differ from other programming languages?
Explain the difference between INNER JOIN and LEFT JOIN with examples.
Write a SQL query to find the second highest salary from a table named Employees.
What are primary keys and foreign keys? Provide examples.
Write a SQL query to retrieve all records from a table named Products where the price is greater than 100.
Explain the concept of normalization and its types.
Write a SQL query to count the number of employees in each department from a table named Employees.
What is a subquery? Provide an example of a subquery in a SELECT statement.
Write a SQL query to find all customers who have placed more than 5 orders from a table named Orders.
Explain the difference between UNION and UNION ALL.
Write a SQL query to update the email address of a customer in a table named Customers.
What are indexes in SQL? How do they improve query performance?
Write a SQL query to delete all records from a table named Logs where the created_at date is older than 1 year.
Explain the ACID properties in the context of database transactions.
Write a SQL query to retrieve the top 3 highest-paid employees from a table named Employees.
What is a view in SQL? How is it different from a table?
Write a SQL query to find the total sales amount from a table named Sales grouped by product.
Explain the concept of stored procedures and their advantages.
Write a SQL query to find all products that have not been sold from a table named Products and a table named Sales.
What is the purpose of the GROUP BY clause? Provide an example.
Write a SQL query to retrieve the names of employees who have the same job title as 'Manager'.
Explain the difference between a clustered index and a non-clustered index.
Write a SQL query to find the average salary of employees in each department from a table named Employees.
What is a trigger in SQL? Provide an example of when you might use one.
Write a SQL query to retrieve all distinct values from a column named Category in a table named Products.
What are window functions and how do they differ from aggregate functions?
Write a SQL query to find the nth highest salary using window functions.
Explain the difference between HAVING and WHERE clauses.
What is a Common Table Expression (CTE) and when would you use it?
Write a SQL query to find duplicate records in a table.
What is the difference between DELETE, TRUNCATE, and DROP?
How do you handle NULL values in SQL queries?
Write a SQL query to calculate a running total.
What are the different types of constraints in SQL?
Explain the concept of database transactions and isolation levels.
Write a SQL query to pivot data from rows to columns.
What is the difference between RANK(), DENSE_RANK(), and ROW_NUMBER()?
How do you optimize SQL query performance?
What are user-defined functions and how do they differ from stored procedures?
Write a SQL query to find the percentage of total sales for each product.
What is the difference between correlated and non-correlated subqueries?
How do you handle date and time operations in SQL?
Write a SQL query to find records that exist in one table but not in another.
What is database denormalization and when would you use it?
Explain the difference between a primary key and a unique key.
Write a SQL query to find the median value from a column.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of using views?
How do you implement full-text search in SQL?
Write a SQL query to find the first and last record for each group.
What is the purpose of the COALESCE function?
Explain the concept of recursive queries and provide an example.
What are materialized views and how do they differ from regular views?
Write a SQL query to calculate year-over-year growth percentage.
How do you handle large dataset queries efficiently?
What is the difference between CHAR and VARCHAR data types?
Write a SQL query to find gaps in sequential data.
Explain the concept of database partitioning and its types.
What are database locks and how do they work?
Write a SQL query to transpose rows to columns dynamically.
How do you implement audit trails in SQL databases?
What is the difference between OLTP and OLAP systems?
Write a SQL query to find the top N customers by sales in each region.
How do you handle database schema migrations?
What are the considerations for choosing appropriate data types?
Write a SQL query to calculate moving averages.
How do you implement row-level security in SQL databases?
What is the purpose of database connection pooling?
Write a SQL query to find customers who haven't placed orders in the last 6 months.
How do you handle database backup and recovery strategies?
What are the best practices for SQL query writing?
Write a SQL query to find overlapping date ranges.
How do you implement database replication and what are its types?
What is database sharding and when would you implement it?
Write a SQL query to calculate retention rates.
How do you monitor and troubleshoot database performance issues?
What are database constraints and how do they ensure data integrity?
Write a SQL query to generate a calendar table.
How do you implement database versioning and change management?
What are the security considerations for SQL databases?
Write a SQL query to find the longest consecutive sequence.
How do you handle time zone considerations in global applications?
What is the difference between database clustering and replication?
Write a SQL query to implement a recommendation system using collaborative filtering.
How do you implement data archiving strategies?
What are the considerations for database capacity planning?
Write a SQL query to detect anomalies in time-series data.
How do you implement database disaster recovery procedures?
What are the emerging trends in database technology?
Write a SQL query to implement a simple rating system with weighted averages.
How do you optimize database storage and reduce costs?
What are the key considerations for migrating from legacy database systems?
1. What is SQL and how does it differ from other programming languages?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding the fundamental differences between SQL and other programming languages is crucial for roles that involve database management and data manipulation, such as a Database Administrator or Data Analyst.

How to answer:

Define SQL as a domain-specific language used for managing and manipulating relational databases.
Highlight that SQL is declarative, focusing on what data to retrieve rather than how to retrieve it.
Contrast SQL with general-purpose programming languages, emphasizing its specialized use for database operations.
Example answer:

"SQL, or Structured Query Language, is a domain-specific language designed for managing and manipulating relational databases. Unlike general-purpose programming languages, SQL is declarative, meaning it focuses on what data to retrieve rather than how to retrieve it."

2. Explain the difference between INNER JOIN and LEFT JOIN with examples.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding the difference between INNER JOIN and LEFT JOIN is essential for roles that require complex data retrieval and manipulation, such as a Data Engineer or SQL Developer.

How to answer:

Define INNER JOIN as a join that returns only the matching rows from both tables.
Explain LEFT JOIN as a join that returns all rows from the left table and the matching rows from the right table, with NULLs for non-matching rows.
Provide a simple example query for each join to illustrate the differences.
Example answer:

"An INNER JOIN returns only the rows that have matching values in both tables, while a LEFT JOIN returns all rows from the left table and the matching rows from the right table, with NULL values for non-matching rows. For example, SELECT * FROM Orders INNER JOIN Customers ON Orders.CustomerID = Customers.CustomerID retrieves only the orders with matching customers, whereas SELECT * FROM Orders LEFT JOIN Customers ON Orders.CustomerID = Customers.CustomerID retrieves all orders, including those without matching customers."

3. Write a SQL query to find the second highest salary from a table named Employees.
Why you might get asked this: This question tests your ability to write complex SQL queries and demonstrates your problem-solving skills, which are crucial for roles like Data Analyst or Database Developer.

How to answer:

Explain the use of the LIMIT clause to restrict the number of rows returned.
Describe the use of a subquery to find the highest salary and exclude it from the results.
Provide a sample query using ORDER BY and LIMIT to retrieve the second highest salary.
Example answer:

"To find the second highest salary from a table named Employees, you can use a subquery to first identify the highest salary and then exclude it from the results. The query would look like this: SELECT MAX(Salary) FROM Employees WHERE Salary < (SELECT MAX(Salary) FROM Employees)."

4. What are primary keys and foreign keys? Provide examples.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding primary keys and foreign keys is fundamental for ensuring data integrity and establishing relationships between tables, which is crucial for roles like Database Administrator or Data Architect.

How to answer:

Define a primary key as a unique identifier for each record in a table.
Explain a foreign key as a field in one table that uniquely identifies a row of another table.
Provide examples using simple table structures, such as an EmployeeID in an Employees table and a DepartmentID in a Departments table.
Example answer:

"A primary key is a unique identifier for each record in a table, ensuring that no two rows have the same key. A foreign key is a field in one table that uniquely identifies a row of another table, establishing a relationship between the two tables, such as EmployeeID in an Employees table and DepartmentID in a Departments table."

5. Write a SQL query to retrieve all records from a table named Products where the price is greater than 100.
Why you might get asked this: This question assesses your ability to write basic SQL queries for data retrieval, a fundamental skill for any role involving database management, such as a Data Analyst or SQL Developer.

How to answer:

Explain the use of the SELECT statement to retrieve data from the table.
Describe the WHERE clause to filter records based on the price condition.
Provide a sample query using SELECT * FROM Products WHERE price > 100.
Example answer:

"To retrieve all records from a table named Products where the price is greater than 100, you can use the following SQL query: SELECT * FROM Products WHERE price > 100; This query selects all columns from the Products table where the price column has a value greater than 100."

6. Explain the concept of normalization and its types.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding the concept of normalization and its types is crucial for ensuring efficient database design and data integrity, which is essential for roles like Database Administrator or Data Architect, for example.

How to answer:

Define normalization as the process of organizing data to reduce redundancy and improve data integrity.
Briefly describe the different normal forms, such as 1NF, 2NF, and 3NF, and their purposes.
Provide a simple example to illustrate how normalization is applied in a database.
Example answer:

"Normalization is the process of organizing data in a database to reduce redundancy and improve data integrity. It involves dividing large tables into smaller, related tables and defining relationships between them to ensure data consistency."

7. Write a SQL query to count the number of employees in each department from a table named Employees.
Why you might get asked this: This question evaluates your ability to write aggregate queries, a fundamental skill for roles that involve data analysis and reporting, such as a Data Analyst or Business Intelligence Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Explain the use of the GROUP BY clause to group records by department.
Describe the use of the COUNT function to count the number of employees in each group.
Provide a sample query using SELECT Department, COUNT(*) FROM Employees GROUP BY Department.
Example answer:

"To count the number of employees in each department from a table named Employees, you can use the GROUP BY clause along with the COUNT function. The query would look like this: SELECT Department, COUNT(*) FROM Employees GROUP BY Department;"

8. What is a subquery? Provide an example of a subquery in a SELECT statement.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding subqueries and their application in SELECT statements is essential for roles that require complex data retrieval and manipulation, such as a Data Analyst or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Define a subquery as a query nested within another query.
Explain that subqueries can be used in SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE statements.
Provide a simple example, such as SELECT * FROM Employees WHERE Salary > (SELECT AVG(Salary) FROM Employees).
Example answer:

"A subquery is a query nested within another query, often used to perform operations that require multiple steps. For example, SELECT * FROM Employees WHERE Salary > (SELECT AVG(Salary) FROM Employees) retrieves employees with salaries above the average."

9. Write a SQL query to find all customers who have placed more than 5 orders from a table named Orders.
Why you might get asked this: This question tests your ability to write complex SQL queries involving aggregate functions and conditional logic, which are crucial skills for roles that require data analysis and reporting, such as a Data Analyst or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Explain the use of the GROUP BY clause to group records by customer.
Describe the use of the HAVING clause to filter groups with more than 5 orders.
Provide a sample query using SELECT CustomerID FROM Orders GROUP BY CustomerID HAVING COUNT(*) > 5.
Example answer:

"To find all customers who have placed more than 5 orders from a table named Orders, you can use the GROUP BY clause to group records by customer and the HAVING clause to filter groups with more than 5 orders. The query would look like this: SELECT CustomerID FROM Orders GROUP BY CustomerID HAVING COUNT(*) > 5;"

10. Explain the difference between UNION and UNION ALL.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding the difference between UNION and UNION ALL is crucial for roles that require data consolidation and query optimization, such as a Data Analyst or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Define UNION as a command that combines the results of two queries and removes duplicate rows.
Explain UNION ALL as a command that combines the results of two queries without removing duplicates.
Provide a simple example query for each to illustrate the differences.
Example answer:

"A UNION combines the results of two queries and removes duplicate rows, ensuring each row is unique in the final result set. In contrast, UNION ALL combines the results of two queries without removing duplicates, which can be more efficient when duplicates are not a concern."

11. Write a SQL query to update the email address of a customer in a table named Customers.
Why you might get asked this: This question assesses your ability to perform data updates, a fundamental skill for roles that involve database management and maintenance, such as a Database Administrator or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Explain the use of the UPDATE statement to modify existing records in the table.
Describe the SET clause to specify the new email address.
Include the WHERE clause to target the specific customer whose email address needs updating.
Example answer:

"To update the email address of a customer in a table named Customers, you can use the UPDATE statement along with the SET clause to specify the new email address. The query would look like this: UPDATE Customers SET email = 'newemail@example.com' WHERE customer_id = 1;"

12. What are indexes in SQL? How do they improve query performance?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding indexes and their impact on query performance is crucial for optimizing database operations, which is essential for roles that involve database management and optimization, such as a Database Administrator or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Define indexes as database objects that improve the speed of data retrieval operations.
Explain that indexes work by creating a data structure that allows for faster searches.
Highlight that while indexes improve read performance, they can slow down write operations due to the overhead of maintaining the index.
Example answer:

"Indexes in SQL are special data structures that improve the speed of data retrieval operations on a database table. They work by creating a quick lookup reference for the database, significantly reducing the time it takes to find specific rows."

13. Write a SQL query to delete all records from a table named Logs where the created_at date is older than 1 year.
Why you might get asked this: This question evaluates your ability to perform data maintenance tasks, which are crucial for roles that involve database management and optimization, such as a Database Administrator or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Explain the use of the DELETE statement to remove records from the table.
Describe the WHERE clause to filter records based on the created_at date.
Provide a sample query using DELETE FROM Logs WHERE created_at < NOW() - INTERVAL 1 YEAR.
Example answer:

"To delete all records from a table named Logs where the created_at date is older than 1 year, you can use the following SQL query: DELETE FROM Logs WHERE created_at < NOW() - INTERVAL 1 YEAR; This query ensures that only records older than one year are removed, keeping your table up-to-date."

14. Explain the ACID properties in the context of database transactions.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding the ACID properties is crucial for ensuring data integrity and reliability in database transactions, which is essential for roles that involve database management and optimization, such as a Database Administrator or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Define ACID as a set of properties that ensure reliable database transactions.
Briefly describe each property: Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability.
Provide a simple example to illustrate how these properties maintain data integrity.
Example answer:

"ACID properties ensure reliable database transactions by maintaining data integrity. They stand for Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability, which collectively guarantee that transactions are processed reliably."

15. Write a SQL query to retrieve the top 3 highest-paid employees from a table named Employees.
Why you might get asked this: This question tests your ability to write queries that involve sorting and limiting results, which is crucial for roles that require data analysis and reporting, such as a Data Analyst or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Explain the use of the ORDER BY clause to sort the salaries in descending order.
Describe the use of the LIMIT clause to restrict the number of rows returned to three.
Provide a sample query using SELECT * FROM Employees ORDER BY Salary DESC LIMIT 3.
Example answer:

"To retrieve the top 3 highest-paid employees from a table named Employees, you can use the ORDER BY clause to sort the salaries in descending order and the LIMIT clause to restrict the number of rows returned to three. The query would look like this: SELECT * FROM Employees ORDER BY Salary DESC LIMIT 3;"

16. What is a view in SQL? How is it different from a table?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding the concept of views and their differences from tables is crucial for roles that involve database management and optimization, such as a Database Administrator or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Define a view as a virtual table based on the result set of a SQL query.
Explain that views do not store data physically but provide a way to simplify complex queries.
Highlight that unlike tables, views are dynamic and reflect changes in the underlying data in real-time.
Example answer:

"A view in SQL is a virtual table created based on the result set of a SQL query. Unlike a table, a view does not store data physically but provides a way to simplify complex queries."

17. Write a SQL query to find the total sales amount from a table named Sales grouped by product.
Why you might get asked this: This question evaluates your ability to perform aggregate calculations and group data, which are essential skills for roles that involve data analysis and reporting, such as a Data Analyst or Business Intelligence Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Explain the use of the SUM function to calculate the total sales amount.
Describe the GROUP BY clause to group the results by product.
Provide a sample query using SELECT product, SUM(amount) FROM Sales GROUP BY product.
Example answer:

"To find the total sales amount from a table named Sales grouped by product, you can use the SUM function along with the GROUP BY clause. The query would look like this: SELECT product, SUM(amount) FROM Sales GROUP BY product;"

18. Explain the concept of stored procedures and their advantages.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding stored procedures and their advantages is crucial for roles that involve database management and optimization, such as a Database Administrator or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Define a stored procedure as a precompiled collection of SQL statements.
Explain that stored procedures improve performance by reducing the need for repeated parsing and compilation.
Highlight that they enhance security by encapsulating business logic and restricting direct access to data.
Example answer:

"A stored procedure is a precompiled collection of SQL statements that can be executed as a single unit. They improve performance by reducing the need for repeated parsing and compilation, and enhance security by encapsulating business logic and restricting direct access to data."

19. Write a SQL query to find all products that have not been sold from a table named Products and a table named Sales.
Why you might get asked this: This question tests your ability to perform complex data retrieval operations involving multiple tables, which is crucial for roles that require advanced SQL skills, such as a Data Analyst or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Explain the use of a subquery to identify products that have been sold.
Describe the use of the NOT IN clause to filter out sold products from the Products table.
Provide a sample query using SELECT * FROM Products WHERE ProductID NOT IN (SELECT ProductID FROM Sales).
Example answer:

"To find all products that have not been sold, you can use a subquery to identify sold products and then filter them out from the Products table. The query would look like this: SELECT * FROM Products WHERE ProductID NOT IN (SELECT ProductID FROM Sales);"

20. What is the purpose of the GROUP BY clause? Provide an example.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding the purpose of the GROUP BY clause is essential for roles that involve data aggregation and reporting, such as a Data Analyst or Business Intelligence Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Explain that the GROUP BY clause is used to group rows that have the same values in specified columns.
Highlight that it allows aggregate functions like SUM, COUNT, and AVG to be applied to each group.
Provide a simple example, such as SELECT department, COUNT(*) FROM Employees GROUP BY department.
Example answer:

"The GROUP BY clause is used to group rows that have the same values in specified columns, allowing aggregate functions to be applied to each group. For example, SELECT department, COUNT(*) FROM Employees GROUP BY department counts the number of employees in each department."

21. Write a SQL query to retrieve the names of employees who have the same job title as 'Manager'.
Why you might get asked this: This question tests your ability to write SQL queries that involve string matching and filtering, which is crucial for roles that require data retrieval and manipulation, such as a Data Analyst or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Explain the use of the SELECT statement to retrieve employee names.
Describe the WHERE clause to filter employees with the job title 'Manager'.
Provide a sample query using SELECT name FROM Employees WHERE job_title = 'Manager'.
Example answer:

"To retrieve the names of employees who have the same job title as 'Manager', you can use the following SQL query: SELECT name FROM Employees WHERE job_title = 'Manager'; This query selects the names of all employees whose job title is 'Manager' from the Employees table."

22. Explain the difference between a clustered index and a non-clustered index.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding the difference between a clustered index and a non-clustered index is crucial for optimizing database performance, which is essential for roles that involve database management and optimization, such as a Database Administrator or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Define a clustered index as a type of index that sorts and stores the data rows in the table based on the index key.
Explain that a non-clustered index creates a separate structure to store the index and includes a pointer to the data rows.
Highlight that a table can have only one clustered index but multiple non-clustered indexes.
Example answer:

"A clustered index sorts and stores the data rows in the table based on the index key, making data retrieval faster. In contrast, a non-clustered index creates a separate structure to store the index and includes a pointer to the data rows, allowing for multiple non-clustered indexes on a table."

23. Write a SQL query to find the average salary of employees in each department from a table named Employees.
Why you might get asked this: This question evaluates your ability to perform aggregate calculations and group data, which are essential skills for roles that involve data analysis and reporting, such as a Data Analyst or Business Intelligence Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Explain the use of the AVG function to calculate the average salary.
Describe the GROUP BY clause to group the results by department.
Provide a sample query using SELECT department, AVG(salary) FROM Employees GROUP BY department.
Example answer:

"To find the average salary of employees in each department from a table named Employees, you can use the AVG function along with the GROUP BY clause. The query would look like this: SELECT department, AVG(salary) FROM Employees GROUP BY department;"

24. What is a trigger in SQL? Provide an example of when you might use one.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding triggers and their applications is crucial for automating database tasks and ensuring data integrity, which is essential for roles that involve database management and optimization, such as a Database Administrator or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Define a trigger as a special type of stored procedure that automatically executes in response to certain events on a table or view.
Explain that triggers can be used to enforce business rules, maintain audit trails, or synchronize tables.
Provide an example, such as using a trigger to automatically update a stock quantity in an inventory table when a new order is inserted.
Example answer:

"A trigger in SQL is a special type of stored procedure that automatically executes in response to certain events on a table or view. For example, you might use a trigger to automatically update a stock quantity in an inventory table when a new order is inserted."

25. Write a SQL query to retrieve all distinct values from a column named Category in a table named Products.
Why you might get asked this: This question tests your ability to write queries that retrieve unique values, a fundamental skill for roles that involve data analysis and reporting, such as a Data Analyst or SQL Developer, for example.

How to answer:

Explain the use of the SELECT DISTINCT statement to retrieve unique values.
Describe the FROM clause to specify the table name.
Provide a sample query using SELECT DISTINCT Category FROM Products.
Example answer:

"To retrieve all distinct values from a column named Category in a table named Products, you can use the SELECT DISTINCT statement. The query would look like this: SELECT DISTINCT Category FROM Products;"

26. What are window functions and how do they differ from aggregate functions?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding window functions is crucial for advanced data analysis and reporting tasks, which is essential for roles like Data Analyst or Business Intelligence Developer.

How to answer:

Define window functions as functions that perform calculations across related rows within a result set.
Explain that unlike aggregate functions, window functions don't group rows into a single output row.
Mention that window functions use the OVER clause to define the window of rows.
Example answer: "Window functions perform calculations across a set of related rows without collapsing them into a single row like aggregate functions do. They use the OVER clause to define the window of rows, enabling calculations like running totals, rankings, and moving averages while preserving individual row details."

27. Write a SQL query to find the nth highest salary using window functions.
Why you might get asked this: This question tests your understanding of advanced SQL techniques for ranking and ordering data, which is crucial for roles involving complex data analysis.

How to answer:

Explain the use of the ROW_NUMBER() or DENSE_RANK() window function.
Describe how to order the data and filter for the specific rank.
Provide a sample query using window functions to find the nth highest salary.
Example answer: "To find the nth highest salary using window functions, you can use DENSE_RANK() to rank salaries and filter for the specific position. The query would look like: SELECT * FROM (SELECT *, DENSE_RANK() OVER (ORDER BY salary DESC) as rank FROM Employees) ranked WHERE rank = n;"

28. Explain the difference between HAVING and WHERE clauses.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding the distinction between HAVING and WHERE is fundamental for proper query construction, especially important for roles involving data filtering and aggregation.

How to answer:

Explain that WHERE filters rows before grouping occurs.
Describe that HAVING filters groups after GROUP BY has been applied.
Mention that HAVING can work with aggregate functions while WHERE cannot.
Example answer: "The WHERE clause filters individual rows before any grouping occurs, while the HAVING clause filters groups after the GROUP BY operation. WHERE cannot use aggregate functions, but HAVING can, making it essential for filtering grouped data based on aggregate conditions."

29. What is a Common Table Expression (CTE) and when would you use it?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding CTEs is important for writing readable and maintainable complex queries, which is valuable for roles involving advanced SQL development.

How to answer:

Define CTE as a named temporary result set that exists within the scope of a single statement.
Explain that CTEs improve query readability and can be referenced multiple times.
Mention use cases like recursive queries, complex joins, and breaking down complex logic.
Example answer: "A Common Table Expression (CTE) is a named temporary result set defined using the WITH clause that exists only for the duration of a query. CTEs improve readability, enable recursive operations, and can be referenced multiple times within the same query, making complex queries more maintainable."

30. Write a SQL query to find duplicate records in a table.
Why you might get asked this: Identifying duplicate data is a common data quality task essential for roles involving data cleaning and database maintenance.

How to answer:

Explain using GROUP BY with the columns to check for duplicates.
Describe using HAVING with COUNT to filter groups with more than one record.
Provide a sample query that identifies duplicate records.
Example answer: "To find duplicate records, you can group by the columns that should be unique and use HAVING to filter groups with more than one record: SELECT column1, column2, COUNT() FROM table_name GROUP BY column1, column2 HAVING COUNT() > 1;"

31. What is the difference between DELETE, TRUNCATE, and DROP?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding different methods of removing data is crucial for database management and maintenance roles.

How to answer:

Explain DELETE removes specific rows and can use WHERE clause.
Describe TRUNCATE removes all rows but keeps table structure.
Mention DROP removes the entire table including structure.
Example answer: "DELETE removes specific rows based on conditions and can be rolled back, TRUNCATE removes all rows quickly but cannot be rolled back in most databases, and DROP removes the entire table structure and data permanently. TRUNCATE is faster than DELETE for removing all data."

32. How do you handle NULL values in SQL queries?
Why you might get asked this: Proper NULL handling is essential for accurate data analysis and preventing unexpected query results.

How to answer:

Explain using IS NULL and IS NOT NULL for checking NULL values.
Mention functions like COALESCE, ISNULL, or IFNULL for handling NULLs.
Describe how NULLs behave in comparisons and aggregate functions.
Example answer: "NULL values require special handling using IS NULL or IS NOT NULL operators. Functions like COALESCE can replace NULLs with default values. NULLs in aggregate functions are typically ignored, and any comparison with NULL returns unknown, not true or false."

33. Write a SQL query to calculate a running total.
Why you might get asked this: Running totals are common in financial and analytical reports, making this skill valuable for data analysis roles.

How to answer:

Explain using window functions with the SUM function.
Describe the ORDER BY clause within the OVER clause.
Provide a sample query showing running total calculation.
Example answer: "To calculate a running total, use the SUM window function with an ORDER BY clause: SELECT date, amount, SUM(amount) OVER (ORDER BY date) as running_total FROM sales ORDER BY date;"

34. What are the different types of constraints in SQL?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding constraints is fundamental for maintaining data integrity, which is crucial for database design and administration roles.

How to answer:

List the main constraint types: PRIMARY KEY, FOREIGN KEY, UNIQUE, NOT NULL, CHECK.
Briefly explain the purpose of each constraint type.
Mention how constraints ensure data integrity and business rules.
Example answer: "SQL constraints include PRIMARY KEY (unique identifier), FOREIGN KEY (referential integrity), UNIQUE (no duplicates), NOT NULL (required values), and CHECK (custom validation rules). These constraints ensure data integrity and enforce business rules at the database level."

35. Explain the concept of database transactions and isolation levels.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding transactions is crucial for maintaining data consistency, especially important for roles involving financial or critical business data.

How to answer:

Define a transaction as a unit of work that either completes entirely or fails entirely.
Explain the four isolation levels: READ UNCOMMITTED, READ COMMITTED, REPEATABLE READ, SERIALIZABLE.
Mention the trade-offs between isolation levels and performance.
Example answer: "A database transaction is a logical unit of work that maintains data consistency. Isolation levels control how transaction changes are visible to other concurrent transactions, ranging from READ UNCOMMITTED (lowest isolation, highest concurrency) to SERIALIZABLE (highest isolation, lowest concurrency)."

36. Write a SQL query to pivot data from rows to columns.
Why you might get asked this: Data pivoting is essential for creating reports and transforming data for analysis, valuable for business intelligence roles.

How to answer:

Explain the concept of pivoting data using CASE statements or PIVOT function.
Describe how to transform row data into column format.
Provide a sample query showing data transformation.
Example answer: "To pivot data, you can use CASE statements with aggregate functions: SELECT product, SUM(CASE WHEN month = 'Jan' THEN sales ELSE 0 END) as Jan_Sales, SUM(CASE WHEN month = 'Feb' THEN sales ELSE 0 END) as Feb_Sales FROM sales_data GROUP BY product;"

37. What is the difference between RANK(), DENSE_RANK(), and ROW_NUMBER()?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding ranking functions is important for data analysis and reporting tasks that require ordering and positioning data.

How to answer:

Explain ROW_NUMBER() assigns unique sequential numbers.
Describe RANK() leaves gaps after ties.
Mention DENSE_RANK() doesn't leave gaps after ties.
Example answer: "ROW_NUMBER() assigns unique sequential numbers regardless of ties. RANK() assigns the same rank to tied values but leaves gaps in subsequent rankings. DENSE_RANK() assigns the same rank to tied values without leaving gaps in the sequence."

38. How do you optimize SQL query performance?
Why you might get asked this: Query optimization is crucial for maintaining application performance, especially important for senior database roles.

How to answer:

Mention proper indexing strategies and query structure.
Explain analyzing execution plans and identifying bottlenecks.
Describe techniques like avoiding SELECT *, using appropriate joins, and limiting result sets.
Example answer: "SQL query optimization involves proper indexing, analyzing execution plans, avoiding SELECT *, using appropriate join types, limiting result sets with WHERE clauses, and ensuring statistics are up to date. Regular monitoring and profiling help identify performance bottlenecks."

39. What are user-defined functions and how do they differ from stored procedures?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding different database objects is important for advanced database development and maintenance roles.

How to answer:

Define user-defined functions as reusable code blocks that return values.
Explain that functions return values while stored procedures may not.
Mention that functions can be used in SELECT statements while procedures cannot.
Example answer: "User-defined functions are reusable code blocks that return values and can be used within SQL statements like SELECT queries. Unlike stored procedures, functions must return a value and cannot perform operations like INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE on the same database."

40. Write a SQL query to find the percentage of total sales for each product.
Why you might get asked this: Calculating percentages is common in business analysis and reporting, valuable for analytical roles.

How to answer:

Explain using window functions to calculate total sales.
Describe how to calculate individual product sales as a percentage of total.
Provide a sample query showing percentage calculation.
Example answer: "To find the percentage of total sales for each product: SELECT product, sales, (sales * 100.0 / SUM(sales) OVER()) as percentage_of_total FROM product_sales;"

41. What is the difference between correlated and non-correlated subqueries?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding subquery types is important for writing efficient complex queries, essential for advanced SQL development roles.

How to answer:

Define non-correlated subqueries as independent of the outer query.
Explain correlated subqueries reference columns from the outer query.
Mention performance implications of each type.
Example answer: "Non-correlated subqueries are independent and execute once, returning results used by the outer query. Correlated subqueries reference the outer query and execute once for each row of the outer query, often making them slower but more flexible for row-by-row comparisons."

42. How do you handle date and time operations in SQL?
Why you might get asked this: Date and time manipulation is common in business applications, important for roles involving temporal data analysis.

How to answer:

Mention common date functions like DATE_ADD, DATEDIFF, EXTRACT.
Explain formatting dates and handling time zones.
Describe best practices for date storage and querying.
Example answer: "Date and time operations use functions like DATE_ADD for arithmetic, DATEDIFF for calculating differences, and EXTRACT for getting specific parts. Always consider time zones, use appropriate data types (DATE, DATETIME, TIMESTAMP), and be careful with date formatting for consistent results."

43. Write a SQL query to find records that exist in one table but not in another.
Why you might get asked this: Finding data differences between tables is common in data validation and migration tasks.

How to answer:

Explain using LEFT JOIN with IS NULL condition.
Describe alternative approaches using NOT EXISTS or EXCEPT.
Provide sample queries showing different methods.
Example answer: "To find records in table A but not in table B, use: SELECT a.* FROM tableA a LEFT JOIN tableB b ON a.id = b.id WHERE b.id IS NULL; Alternatively, use NOT EXISTS: SELECT * FROM tableA WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT 1 FROM tableB WHERE tableB.id = tableA.id);"

44. What is database denormalization and when would you use it?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding when to denormalize is important for performance optimization in large-scale systems.

How to answer:

Define denormalization as intentionally introducing redundancy for performance.
Explain scenarios where denormalization is beneficial.
Mention trade-offs between performance and data integrity.
Example answer: "Denormalization intentionally introduces redundancy to improve query performance by reducing joins. It's useful for read-heavy systems, data warehouses, and reporting databases where query speed is more important than storage efficiency, but it requires careful maintenance to ensure data consistency."

45. Explain the difference between a primary key and a unique key.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding key constraints is fundamental for database design and data integrity.

How to answer:

Explain that primary keys cannot be NULL and there can be only one per table.
Describe that unique keys can be NULL and there can be multiple per table.
Mention their roles in indexing and referential integrity.
Example answer: "A primary key uniquely identifies rows, cannot contain NULL values, and there can be only one per table. A unique key also ensures uniqueness but can contain NULL values and there can be multiple unique keys per table. Both automatically create indexes."

46. Write a SQL query to find the median value from a column.
Why you might get asked this: Calculating statistical measures like median is important for data analysis roles.

How to answer:

Explain using window functions with PERCENTILE_CONT or similar functions.
Describe alternative approaches using ROW_NUMBER for databases without built-in median functions.
Provide sample queries for calculating median.
Example answer: "To find the median, use PERCENTILE_CONT(0.5) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY column_name) or for databases without this function: SELECT AVG(salary) FROM (SELECT salary, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (ORDER BY salary) as rn, COUNT(*) OVER() as cnt FROM employees) WHERE rn IN ((cnt+1)/2, (cnt+2)/2);"

47. What are the advantages and disadvantages of using views?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding views is important for database design and security implementation.

How to answer:

List advantages: security, simplification, data abstraction.
Mention disadvantages: performance overhead, dependency issues.
Explain when views are most beneficial.
Example answer: "Views provide security by hiding sensitive columns, simplify complex queries, and offer data abstraction. However, they can have performance overhead, create dependencies, and complex views may not be updatable. They're best for frequently used complex queries and security requirements."

48. How do you implement full-text search in SQL?
Why you might get asked this: Full-text search capabilities are important for applications requiring advanced search functionality.

How to answer:

Explain full-text indexes and search functions like MATCH AGAINST.
Mention different search modes (natural language, Boolean).
Describe limitations and alternatives.
Example answer: "Full-text search uses specialized indexes and functions like MATCH() AGAINST() in MySQL or CONTAINS() in SQL Server. It supports natural language and Boolean search modes, ranking results by relevance. For complex requirements, dedicated search engines like Elasticsearch might be more appropriate."

49. Write a SQL query to find the first and last record for each group.
Why you might get asked this: Finding boundary records is common in time-series analysis and reporting.

How to answer:

Explain using window functions with FIRST_VALUE and LAST_VALUE.
Describe alternative approaches using subqueries and joins.
Provide sample queries showing different methods.
Example answer: "To find first and last records per group: SELECT *, FIRST_VALUE(value) OVER (PARTITION BY group_id ORDER BY date), LAST_VALUE(value) OVER (PARTITION BY group_id ORDER BY date ROWS BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING) FROM table_name;"

50. What is the purpose of the COALESCE function?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding NULL handling functions is important for data quality and accurate reporting.

How to answer:

Define COALESCE as a function that returns the first non-NULL value.
Explain its use in handling NULL values and providing defaults.
Provide examples of practical applications.
Example answer: "COALESCE returns the first non-NULL value from a list of expressions, making it useful for handling NULL values and providing default values. For example, COALESCE(middle_name, '') returns an empty string if middle_name is NULL, ensuring consistent output formatting."

51. Explain the concept of recursive queries and provide an example.
Why you might get asked this: Recursive queries are important for hierarchical data processing, valuable for advanced database development roles.

How to answer:

Define recursive queries as queries that reference themselves.
Explain the structure with anchor and recursive members.
Provide an example using hierarchical data like organizational charts.
Example answer: "Recursive queries use Common Table Expressions to process hierarchical data by referencing themselves. They consist of an anchor member (base case) and recursive member. Example: WITH RECURSIVE emp_hierarchy AS (SELECT id, name, manager_id, 1 as level FROM employees WHERE manager_id IS NULL UNION ALL SELECT e.id, e.name, e.manager_id, eh.level+1 FROM employees e JOIN emp_hierarchy eh ON e.manager_id = eh.id) SELECT * FROM emp_hierarchy;"

52. What are materialized views and how do they differ from regular views?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding materialized views is important for performance optimization in data warehousing and analytics.

How to answer:

Define materialized views as physical storage of view results.
Explain performance benefits and refresh mechanisms.
Describe trade-offs with storage and data freshness.
Example answer: "Materialized views physically store query results, providing faster access than regular views that execute queries each time. They're ideal for complex aggregations and reporting but require refresh strategies to maintain data currency and consume additional storage space."

53. Write a SQL query to calculate year-over-year growth percentage.
Why you might get asked this: Year-over-year calculations are common in business analytics and financial reporting.

How to answer:

Explain using window functions with LAG to get previous year values.
Describe the formula for calculating growth percentage.
Provide a sample query showing the calculation.
Example answer: "To calculate year-over-year growth: SELECT year, revenue, LAG(revenue) OVER (ORDER BY year) as prev_year_revenue, ((revenue - LAG(revenue) OVER (ORDER BY year)) * 100.0 / LAG(revenue) OVER (ORDER BY year)) as yoy_growth_pct FROM annual_revenue ORDER BY year;"

54. How do you handle large dataset queries efficiently?
Why you might get asked this: Optimizing queries for large datasets is crucial for enterprise-level database performance.

How to answer:

Mention partitioning strategies and proper indexing.
Explain query optimization techniques and pagination.
Describe using appropriate hardware and configuration.
Example answer: "For large datasets, use table partitioning, proper indexing, query optimization with execution plan analysis, pagination for result sets, and consider parallel processing. Also implement appropriate WHERE clauses to limit data scanned and use summary tables for frequently accessed aggregations."

55. What is the difference between CHAR and VARCHAR data types?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding data types is fundamental for efficient database design and storage optimization.

How to answer:

Explain CHAR as fixed-length and VARCHAR as variable-length.
Mention storage implications and performance considerations.
Describe when to use each type.
Example answer: "CHAR is fixed-length and pads shorter values with spaces, while VARCHAR is variable-length and stores only the actual characters. CHAR is faster for fixed-size data but wastes space, while VARCHAR is more storage-efficient but has slight performance overhead for variable-length data."

56. Write a SQL query to find gaps in sequential data.
Why you might get asked this: Finding gaps in sequences is common in inventory management and audit scenarios.

How to answer:

Explain using window functions to identify missing sequences.
Describe comparing expected vs actual sequence values.
Provide a sample query for gap detection.
Example answer: "To find gaps in sequential data: SELECT (LAG(id) OVER (ORDER BY id) + 1) as gap_start, (id - 1) as gap_end FROM table_name WHERE id - LAG(id) OVER (ORDER BY id) > 1;"

57. Explain the concept of database partitioning and its types.
Why you might get asked this: Understanding partitioning is important for managing large databases and improving query performance.

How to answer:

Define partitioning as dividing large tables into smaller manageable pieces.
Explain different types: range, list, hash, and composite partitioning.
Mention benefits like improved performance and maintenance.
Example answer: "Database partitioning divides large tables into smaller, manageable segments based on partition keys. Types include range (date ranges), list (specific values), hash (even distribution), and composite (combination). Benefits include improved query performance, easier maintenance, and parallel processing capabilities."

58. What are database locks and how do they work?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding locking mechanisms is crucial for database concurrency and performance management.

How to answer:

Define locks as mechanisms to control concurrent access to data.
Explain different lock types: shared, exclusive, update locks.
Mention deadlocks and lock escalation.
Example answer: "Database locks control concurrent access to data, preventing conflicts between transactions. Types include shared locks (allow multiple reads), exclusive locks (prevent all other access), and update locks (prevent deadlocks during updates). Proper lock management prevents data corruption while maintaining concurrency."

59. Write a SQL query to transpose rows to columns dynamically.
Why you might get asked this: Dynamic transposition is useful for flexible reporting and data presentation.

How to answer:

Explain challenges of dynamic pivoting without knowing column names.
Describe using dynamic SQL or specific database features.
Provide an approach using conditional aggregation.
Example answer: "Dynamic transposition requires dynamic SQL since column names aren't known beforehand. Example approach: Build the SQL string dynamically based on distinct values in the pivot column, then execute it. Some databases offer PIVOT operators, but most require conditional aggregation with dynamically built CASE statements."

60. How do you implement audit trails in SQL databases?
Why you might get asked this: Audit trails are important for compliance and security requirements in enterprise applications.

How to answer:

Explain using triggers to capture data changes.
Mention audit table design with old/new values and metadata.
Describe alternative approaches like Change Data Capture.
Example answer: "Audit trails track data changes using triggers that insert records into audit tables containing old values, new values, operation type, user, and timestamp. Alternative approaches include Change Data Capture (CDC) features, database logs analysis, or application-level logging for better performance."

61. What is the difference between OLTP and OLAP systems?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding different database architectures is important for system design and data architecture roles.

How to answer:

Define OLTP as transaction-focused systems for daily operations.
Explain OLAP as analytics-focused systems for decision support.
Mention design differences and optimization strategies.
Example answer: "OLTP (Online Transaction Processing) systems handle high-volume transactions with normalized databases optimized for INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE operations. OLAP (Online Analytical Processing) systems are designed for complex queries and reporting with denormalized, dimensional models optimized for SELECT operations and aggregations."

62. Write a SQL query to find the top N customers by sales in each region.
Why you might get asked this: Ranking within groups is common in business analytics and competitive analysis.

How to answer:

Explain using window functions with partitioning.
Describe ranking and filtering for top N results.
Provide a sample query using ROW_NUMBER or RANK.
Example answer: "To find top N customers by sales in each region: SELECT * FROM (SELECT customer, region, sales, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY region ORDER BY sales DESC) as rn FROM customer_sales) ranked WHERE rn <= N;"

63. How do you handle database schema migrations?
Why you might get asked this: Schema migrations are crucial for application deployment and database evolution management.

How to answer:

Explain version control for database schemas.
Mention migration tools and rollback strategies.
Describe testing and deployment best practices.
Example answer: "Database schema migrations use version-controlled scripts with tools like Flyway or Liquibase. Each migration is numbered sequentially, tested thoroughly, and includes rollback procedures. Best practices include backward compatibility, data migration validation, and coordination with application deployments."

64. What are the considerations for choosing appropriate data types?
Why you might get asked this: Proper data type selection affects storage efficiency, performance, and data integrity.

How to answer:

Mention storage requirements and performance implications.
Explain precision needs and range considerations.
Describe future scalability and standardization.
Example answer: "Data type selection considers storage efficiency, query performance, data range and precision requirements, and future scalability. Choose the smallest appropriate type, consider indexing implications, ensure proper precision for calculations, and maintain consistency across similar fields in the database."

65. Write a SQL query to calculate moving averages.
Why you might get asked this: Moving averages are important for trend analysis and financial calculations.

How to answer:

Explain using window functions with frame specifications.
Describe different frame options like ROWS and RANGE.
Provide sample queries for different moving average periods.
Example answer: "To calculate a moving average: SELECT date, value, AVG(value) OVER (ORDER BY date ROWS BETWEEN 2 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW) as moving_avg_3_days FROM sales_data ORDER BY date;"

66. How do you implement row-level security in SQL databases?
Why you might get asked this: Row-level security is important for multi-tenant applications and data privacy compliance.

How to answer:

Explain using security policies and predicates.
Mention role-based access control implementation.
Describe alternative approaches using views and functions.
Example answer: "Row-level security uses security policies with predicates to filter rows based on user context. Implementation involves creating security functions that return filter conditions, then applying them as policies. Alternative approaches include using views with user-based WHERE clauses or application-level filtering."

67. What is the purpose of database connection pooling?
Why you might get asked this: Connection pooling is crucial for application performance and resource management.

How to answer:

Explain reducing connection overhead and resource usage.
Mention improved application scalability and performance.
Describe configuration considerations and best practices.
Example answer: "Database connection pooling reuses existing connections instead of creating new ones for each request, reducing overhead and improving performance. It manages a pool of connections shared among application threads, preventing connection exhaustion and providing better resource utilization and scalability."

68. Write a SQL query to find customers who haven't placed orders in the last 6 months.
Why you might get asked this: Identifying inactive customers is important for customer retention and marketing analytics.

How to answer:

Explain using LEFT JOIN with date filtering.
Describe alternative approaches with NOT EXISTS.
Provide sample queries showing different methods.
Example answer: "To find inactive customers: SELECT c.* FROM customers c LEFT JOIN orders o ON c.customer_id = o.customer_id AND o.order_date >= DATE_SUB(NOW(), INTERVAL 6 MONTH) WHERE o.customer_id IS NULL;"

69. How do you handle database backup and recovery strategies?
Why you might get asked this: Backup and recovery planning is critical for database administration and business continuity.

How to answer:

Explain different backup types: full, incremental, differential.
Mention recovery models and point-in-time recovery.
Describe testing and automation strategies.
Example answer: "Database backup strategies include full backups (complete database), incremental (changes since last backup), and differential (changes since last full backup). Recovery planning involves defining RTO/RPO requirements, implementing automated backup schedules, regular restore testing, and maintaining both local and offsite copies."

70. What are the best practices for SQL query writing?
Why you might get asked this: Following best practices is important for maintainable, efficient, and secure database code.

How to answer:

Mention code formatting, naming conventions, and documentation.
Explain performance optimization and security considerations.
Describe testing and code review practices.
Example answer: "SQL best practices include consistent formatting and naming conventions, avoiding SELECT *, using proper indexing, parameterized queries for security, meaningful aliases, appropriate JOINs, query optimization with execution plans, comprehensive testing, and thorough documentation for complex logic."

71. Write a SQL query to find overlapping date ranges.
Why you might get asked this: Finding overlapping periods is common in scheduling, reservation, and temporal data analysis.

How to answer:

Explain the logic for detecting overlapping intervals.
Describe using self-joins or window functions.
Provide sample queries for overlap detection.
Example answer: "To find overlapping date ranges: SELECT a., b. FROM reservations a JOIN reservations b ON a.id < b.id AND a.start_date <= b.end_date AND a.end_date >= b.start_date;"

72. How do you implement database replication and what are its types?
Why you might get asked this: Database replication is important for high availability, scalability, and disaster recovery.

How to answer:

Explain master-slave and master-master replication.
Mention synchronous vs asynchronous replication.
Describe use cases and trade-offs.
Example answer: "Database replication types include master-slave (read replicas for scaling reads), master-master (bi-directional for high availability), and cluster replication. Synchronous replication ensures consistency but affects performance, while asynchronous replication provides better performance but potential data lag."

73. What is database sharding and when would you implement it?
Why you might get asked this: Sharding is important for scaling very large databases beyond single-server capabilities.

How to answer:

Define sharding as horizontal partitioning across servers.
Explain sharding strategies and key selection.
Mention complexity and trade-offs.
Example answer: "Database sharding horizontally partitions data across multiple servers using a shard key. It's implemented when vertical scaling limits are reached, enabling linear scaling. However, it adds complexity for cross-shard queries, transactions, and requires careful shard key selection to avoid hotspots."

74. Write a SQL query to calculate retention rates.
Why you might get asked this: Retention analysis is crucial for understanding customer behavior and business performance.

How to answer:

Explain defining cohorts and retention periods.
Describe calculating percentage of returning users.
Provide sample queries for retention calculation.
Example answer: "To calculate retention rates: SELECT cohort_month, period_number, COUNT(DISTINCT user_id) * 100.0 / first_month_users as retention_rate FROM user_activity_cohorts GROUP BY cohort_month, period_number ORDER BY cohort_month, period_number;"

75. How do you monitor and troubleshoot database performance issues?
Why you might get asked this: Performance monitoring is crucial for maintaining database health and application performance.

How to answer:

Mention monitoring tools and key metrics.
Explain query analysis and execution plans.
Describe proactive monitoring and alerting.
Example answer: "Database performance monitoring involves tracking metrics like CPU, memory, I/O, and query response times using tools like performance dashboards, slow query logs, and execution plan analysis. Implement alerts for threshold breaches, regular index analysis, and maintain baseline performance metrics for comparison."

76. What are database constraints and how do they ensure data integrity?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding constraints is fundamental for maintaining data quality and business rule enforcement.

How to answer:

List constraint types and their purposes.
Explain how constraints prevent invalid data.
Mention performance implications and best practices.
Example answer: "Database constraints enforce data integrity rules: PRIMARY KEY ensures unique identification, FOREIGN KEY maintains referential integrity, UNIQUE prevents duplicates, NOT NULL requires values, and CHECK validates business rules. They prevent invalid data entry and maintain consistency across the database."

77. Write a SQL query to generate a calendar table.
Why you might get asked this: Calendar tables are useful for date-based reporting and analytics applications.

How to answer:

Explain using recursive CTEs or number sequences.
Describe adding date attributes and business logic.
Provide sample queries for calendar generation.
Example answer: "To generate a calendar table: WITH RECURSIVE calendar AS (SELECT '2024-01-01' as date UNION ALL SELECT DATE_ADD(date, INTERVAL 1 DAY) FROM calendar WHERE date < '2024-12-31') SELECT date, YEAR(date) as year, MONTH(date) as month, DAY(date) as day, DAYNAME(date) as day_name FROM calendar;"

78. How do you implement database versioning and change management?
Why you might get asked this: Version control for databases is important for team collaboration and deployment management.

How to answer:

Explain database migration tools and version control.
Mention change scripts and rollback procedures.
Describe integration with application deployment.
Example answer: "Database versioning uses migration tools like Flyway or Liquibase with version-controlled SQL scripts. Each change is numbered sequentially, includes rollback procedures, and integrates with CI/CD pipelines. This ensures consistent schema evolution across environments and enables reliable deployments."

79. What are the security considerations for SQL databases?
Why you might get asked this: Database security is critical for protecting sensitive data and preventing breaches.

How to answer:

Mention access control, encryption, and SQL injection prevention.
Explain audit logging and network security.
Describe principle of least privilege and regular security updates.
Example answer: "SQL database security includes access control with role-based permissions, encryption at rest and in transit, SQL injection prevention through parameterized queries, comprehensive audit logging, network security with firewalls, regular security updates, and implementing the principle of least privilege for user access."

80. Write a SQL query to find the longest consecutive sequence.
Why you might get asked this: Finding consecutive sequences is useful in gaming, finance, and behavioral analysis.

How to answer:

Explain using window functions to identify sequence breaks.
Describe grouping consecutive elements.
Provide sample queries for sequence analysis.
Example answer: "To find longest consecutive sequence: SELECT MAX(consecutive_count) FROM (SELECT COUNT(*) as consecutive_count FROM (SELECT *, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (ORDER BY value) - ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY value ORDER BY value) as grp FROM sequences) grouped GROUP BY grp) counts;"

81. How do you handle time zone considerations in global applications?
Why you might get asked this: Time zone handling is important for international applications and accurate temporal data management.

How to answer:

Explain storing times in UTC and converting for display.
Mention time zone data types and functions.
Describe best practices for global applications.
Example answer: "Handle time zones by storing all timestamps in UTC and converting to local time zones for display. Use timezone-aware data types like TIMESTAMPTZ, implement proper conversion functions, maintain time zone reference data, and consider daylight saving time changes in business logic."

82. What is the difference between database clustering and replication?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding different high-availability architectures is important for system design decisions.

How to answer:

Define clustering as multiple servers acting as one system.
Explain replication as copying data to multiple servers.
Mention use cases and implementation differences.
Example answer: "Database clustering involves multiple servers working together as a single system with shared storage, providing high availability and load distribution. Replication copies data across separate database instances for read scaling and disaster recovery. Clustering offers automatic failover, while replication requires manual or automated failover management."

83. Write a SQL query to implement a recommendation system using collaborative filtering.
Why you might get asked this: Basic recommendation logic is useful for understanding how data-driven features work in applications.

How to answer:

Explain finding users with similar preferences.
Describe recommending items based on similar users' choices.
Provide sample queries for collaborative filtering.
Example answer: "Basic collaborative filtering: SELECT p2.product_id, COUNT(*) as similarity_score FROM purchases p1 JOIN purchases p2 ON p1.user_id = p2.user_id JOIN purchases p3 ON p3.product_id = p1.product_id WHERE p3.user_id = @target_user AND p2.product_id NOT IN (SELECT product_id FROM purchases WHERE user_id = @target_user) GROUP BY p2.product_id ORDER BY similarity_score DESC;"

84. How do you implement data archiving strategies?
Why you might get asked this: Data archiving is important for managing database size and maintaining performance while preserving historical data.

How to answer:

Explain identifying data for archiving based on age or usage.
Mention archival storage options and retrieval methods.
Describe automation and compliance considerations.
Example answer: "Data archiving strategies involve identifying old or infrequently accessed data, moving it to cheaper storage while maintaining accessibility. Implement automated archiving jobs based on date or usage patterns, use compressed storage formats, maintain indexes for archived data retrieval, and ensure compliance with data retention policies."

85. What are the considerations for database capacity planning?
Why you might get asked this: Capacity planning is crucial for maintaining database performance and avoiding resource constraints.

How to answer:

Mention monitoring current usage trends and growth patterns.
Explain projecting future requirements and resource needs.
Describe planning for peak loads and scalability.
Example answer: "Database capacity planning involves monitoring current storage, CPU, memory, and I/O usage, analyzing growth trends, projecting future requirements based on business growth, planning for peak loads, considering data retention policies, and implementing monitoring alerts for proactive scaling decisions."

86. Write a SQL query to detect anomalies in time-series data.
Why you might get asked this: Anomaly detection is important for monitoring systems and identifying unusual patterns in business data.

How to answer:

Explain using statistical functions to identify outliers.
Describe comparing current values to historical averages.
Provide sample queries for anomaly detection.
Example answer: "To detect anomalies using standard deviation: SELECT *, CASE WHEN ABS(value - avg_value) > 2 * stddev_value THEN 'Anomaly' ELSE 'Normal' END as status FROM (SELECT *, AVG(value) OVER (ORDER BY timestamp ROWS BETWEEN 30 PRECEDING AND 1 PRECEDING) as avg_value, STDDEV(value) OVER (ORDER BY timestamp ROWS BETWEEN 30 PRECEDING AND 1 PRECEDING) as stddev_value FROM time_series_data) analyzed;"

87. How do you implement database disaster recovery procedures?
Why you might get asked this: Disaster recovery planning is critical for business continuity and data protection.

How to answer:

Explain backup strategies and offsite storage.
Mention recovery time and point objectives.
Describe testing and documentation requirements.
Example answer: "Disaster recovery involves regular backups with offsite storage, defining RTO/RPO objectives, maintaining secondary sites or cloud infrastructure, implementing automated failover procedures, regular disaster recovery testing, comprehensive documentation, and staff training for emergency procedures."

88. What are the emerging trends in database technology?
Why you might get asked this: Understanding technology trends is important for making informed architectural decisions and career development.

How to answer:

Mention cloud-native databases and serverless architectures.
Explain NewSQL and distributed database systems.
Describe AI/ML integration and real-time analytics.
Example answer: "Emerging database trends include cloud-native and serverless databases for auto-scaling, NewSQL systems combining ACID guarantees with horizontal scaling, AI/ML integration for automated optimization, real-time analytics with streaming databases, multi-model databases supporting various data types, and edge computing databases for IoT applications."

89. Write a SQL query to implement a simple rating system with weighted averages.
Why you might get asked this: Rating systems are common in e-commerce and review applications.

How to answer:

Explain weighting ratings by factors like recency or reviewer credibility.
Describe calculating weighted averages and handling edge cases.
Provide sample queries for rating calculations.
Example answer: "To implement weighted ratings: SELECT product_id, SUM(rating * weight) / SUM(weight) as weighted_avg_rating FROM (SELECT product_id, rating, CASE WHEN reviewer_level = 'expert' THEN 2.0 WHEN review_date > DATE_SUB(NOW(), INTERVAL 30 DAY) THEN 1.5 ELSE 1.0 END as weight FROM reviews) weighted_reviews GROUP BY product_id;"

90. How do you optimize database storage and reduce costs?
Why you might get asked this: Storage optimization is important for managing database costs and improving performance.

How to answer:

Mention data compression and archiving strategies.
Explain proper data type selection and index optimization.
Describe partitioning and storage tiering approaches.
Example answer: "Database storage optimization involves implementing data compression, choosing appropriate data types, archiving old data, optimizing indexes by removing unused ones, implementing table partitioning, using storage tiering for different data access patterns, and regularly analyzing storage usage patterns to identify optimization opportunities."

91. What are the key considerations for migrating from legacy database systems?
Why you might get asked this: Database migration is common in modernization projects and requires careful planning and execution.

How to answer:

Explain assessing current system and defining migration strategy.
Mention data mapping, testing, and rollback procedures.
Describe minimizing downtime and ensuring data integrity.
Example answer: "Legacy database migration requires thorough assessment of current system, data mapping and transformation planning, choosing appropriate migration tools, extensive testing with production-like data, implementing rollback procedures, planning for minimal downtime, training staff on new systems, and post-migration monitoring to ensure performance and data integrity."