Behavioral Interview Questions for Data Analysts
Behavioral questions in data analyst interviews ask about specific situations you’ve been in in which you had to apply specific skills or knowledge.

For many data analysts, behavioral questions can be fairly tough.

One tip: Always try to relate the question back to your experience and strengths.

1. Describe a time when you spotted an inconsistency. How did you respond?
Successful data analysts can help businesses identify anomalies and respond quickly.

For data sense questions, think about a time you spotted an inconsistency in data quality and how you eventually addressed it.

2. Talk about a time when you had to make a decision with a lot of uncertainty.
Interviewers want to see you demonstrate the following:

Decisiveness – Show the interviewer that you can make decisions and communicate your decision-making process.
Self-direction – Show that you are able to choose a path forward, deduce information, and create a plan of action.
Adaptability – Your response should show that you can adapt your decision-making in a challenging situation.
Here’s an example answer: “In my previous job, I worked on a sales forecasting problem under a strict deadline. However, I was missing the most recent data due to a processing error and only had 3-year-old sales figures. My strategy was applying the growth factor to the data to establish correct correlation and variances. This strategy helped me deliver a close forecast and meet the deadline.”

3. How would you convey insights and the methods you use to a non-technical audience?
Interviewers ask this question to see if you can make complex subjects accessible and that you have a knack for communicating insights in a way that persuades people. Here’s a marketing analytics example response:

“I was working on a customer segmentation project. The marketing department wanted to better segment users. I worked on a presentation and knew the audience wouldn’t understand some of the more complex segmenting strategies. I put together a presentation that talked about the benefits and potential trade-offs of segmenting options like K-means clustering. For each option, I created a slide to show how it worked, and after the presentation, we could have an informed discussion about which approach to use.”

4. How do you set goals and achieve them? Give us an example.
Interviewers want to see that you can set manageable goals and understand your process for achieving them. Don’t forget to mention the challenges you faced, which will make your response more dynamic and insightful. For example, you might say:

“Data visualization was something I struggled with in college. I didn’t have a strong design eye, and my visualizations were hard to read. In my last job, I made it a goal to improve, and there were two strategies that were most helpful. I took an online data visualization course, and I built a clip file of my favorite visualizations. The course was great for building my domain knowledge. However, I felt I learned the most by building my clip file and breaking down what made a good visualization on my own.”

5. Describe a time when you solved a conflict at work.
This question assesses your ability to remain objective at work, communicate effectively in challenging situations, and remain calm under fire. Here’s an example response:

“In my previous job, I was the project manager on a dashboard project. One of the BI engineers wasn’t meeting the deadlines I had laid out, and I brought that up with him. At first, he was defensive and angry with me. But I listened to his concerns about the deadlines and asked what I could do to help. I learned from our conversation that he had a full workload besides this project. I talked with the engineering manager, and we were able to reduce some of his workload. He caught up quickly, and we were able to finish the project on time.”

6. Give an example of a situation when you have shown effectiveness, empathy, humbleness, and adaptability.
This is a leadership question in disguise. If you can relate a time you were an effective leader, chances are you will easily incorporate all of these traits. For example:

“I was the lead on a marketing analytics project. We had a critical deadline to meet, but we were in danger of missing the deadline due to a data processing error. The team morale was low, so I held a quick meeting to lay out a schedule, answer questions, and rally the team. That meeting gave the team the jolt it needed. We made the deadline, and I ensured leadership knew how hard each contributor had worked.”

7. Give me an example of a time when you failed on a project.
This question tests your resilience, how you respond to adversity, and how you learn from your mistakes. You could say:

“I had to give a client a presentation about a data analytics project. I mistakenly assumed the audience had more technical knowledge than they did. The presentation was received with a lot of blank stares. However, I knew the material about our findings was strong. I stopped for questions, and then jumped ahead to the visualizations and findings. This helped get the presentation on track, and by the end, the client was impressed. Now, whenever I have a presentation, I take time to understand the audience before I start working on it.”

8. Talk about an occasion when you used logic to solve a problem.
A strong response to this question shows that you can solve problems creatively and that you don’t just jump at the first or easiest solution. One tip: Illustrate your story with data to make it more credible.

Here’s what you could say: “In my previous job, I was responsible for competitor research, and through my analysis, I noticed that our most significant competitors had increased sales by 5% during Q1. This deviated significantly from our sales forecasts for these accounts. I found that we needed to update our competitor sales models with more recent market research and historical data. I tested the model adjustments, and ultimately, I improved our forecasting accuracy by 15%.”

9. What do you do if you disagree with your manager?
Interviewers ask this question to gauge your emotional maturity, see that you can remain objective, and gain insights into your communication skills. Avoid subjective examples, such as my boss being a micromanager. Instead, you could say:

“One time, I disagreed with my manager over the process for building a dashboard, as their approach was to jump straight into the execution. I knew that it would be better to perform some planning in advance rather than feeling our way through and reacting to roadblocks as they arose, so I documented a plan that could potentially save us time in development. That documentation and planning showed where pitfalls were likely to arise, and by solving for future issues, we could launch the new dashboard three weeks early.”

10. How comfortable are you with presenting insights to stakeholders?
This question is asked to see how confident you are in your communication skills, and it provides insight into how you communicate complex technical ideas. With this question, talk about how you make data and analytics accessible. Try to answer these questions:

Do you create visualizations?
What do you do to prepare for a data analytics presentation?
What strategies do you use to make data more accessible?
What presentation tools do you use?
11. Talk about a time you were surprised by the results of an analytics project.
This question basically asks: Are you open to new ideas in your work? Analysts can get stuck trying to prove their hypothesis, even if the data says otherwise. A successful analyst is OK with being wrong and listens to the data. You could say:

“While working on a customer analytics project, I was surprised to find that a subsegment of our customer base wasn’t actually responding to our offers. We had lumped the subsegment into a larger customer bucket and had assumed that a broader segmentation wouldn’t make a difference. I relayed the insight to the marketing team, and we reduced churn among this subsegment.”

12. Why are you interested in working for this company?
This question is super common in analyst behavioral interviews. However, it still trips a lot of candidates up. Another variation of this question would be: why did you want to work in data analytics?

In your response, your goal should be to convey your passion for the work and discuss what excites you about the company/role. You might focus on the company’s culture, a mentor who inspired you, a recommendation you received, or someone in your network who’s connected with the company. A sample response:

“I’m excited by the possibility of using data to foster stronger social connections amongst friends and peers. I also like to ‘go fast’ and experiment, which fits into Meta’s innovative culture.”

13. Talk about a time when you had trouble communicating with stakeholders. How were you able to overcome it?
Interviewers ask questions like this to assess how you handle adversity and adapt. Don’t be afraid to share what went wrong. B. Describe what you learned and how you will apply it to future work.

Here’s a sample answer for a data analyst role: “I presented a data analytics project to non-technical stakeholders, but my presentation was far too technical. I realized that the audience wasn’t following the technical aspects, so I stopped and asked questions. I spent time clarifying the technical details until there were no questions left. I learned that it’s important to tailor presentations to the audience, so before I start a presentation, I always consider the audience.”