
Marketing Analytics Management

Analytics & Analysis

Build a deeper understanding of user behaviors and use predictive analytics and experimentation to identify the corresponding business opportunities for Chime
Act as a go-to resource to educate stakeholders on how to effectively leverage web analytics tools like Google Analytics as a way to effectively understand visitor behavior on owned surfaces
Deep understanding of marketing metrics, attribution models, and campaign performance measurement, with a strategic mindset to provide actionable recommendations. 
Detail-oriented and ability to multi-task in fast-paced team environment with minimal day-to-day supervision
Deliver regular business critical reports on web performance, ensuring consistency, accuracy and with actionable insights on learnings
Provide a high value consultative layer on top of analytics deliverables; tell relevant and actionable data stories 
Synthesize insights generated from sophisticated analyses into simple, meaningful/profitable, and measurable action items and leverage BI/data visualization tool to communicate to stakeholders 
Lead product development: Design, build and support the Marketing Analytics products by assimilating signals from multiple sources and present the information in a user-friendly way to the stakeholders: Marketing and Brand organization, cross functional users across the company, and the leadership team.
Interprets data analyses by applying findings to contextual settings; and developing insights, reports, and presentations telling a compelling story to stakeholders to enable and influence decision making; and providing context related to data interpretations and/or limitations as appropriate
Develop solutions and provide thought leadership on campaign analytics, full-funnel multi-touch attribution, digital analytics, event analytics, brand analytics, targeting profiles, contact and lead management, pipeline analytics, and map the customer journey.
Lead advanced analytics efforts, focused on performance media measurement, segmentation, customer insights, marketing budget allocation, and forecasting
Drives strategic data-informed decisions by consulting with clients to identify and clarify key business needs; developing outcomes and process measures; translating business requirements; determining data/information needs and data collection methods; developing analysis plans; measuring the impact of business decisions on clients, customers, and/or members; working with clients and staff to identify opportunities and methods to improve efficiencies with analysis; supporting and training end-users; and documenting processes and deliverables
Leverage data from various sources, implementing analytical frameworks, and translating insights into actionable recommendations
Define short-term priorities with a medium to long-term analytics roadmap; build a plan for major analytics projects and transitions such as migration to GA4
Prioritize inbound analytics requests against an established set of business priorities to ensure efficient utilization of resources
 Strategize ways to effectively socialize key insights and make data self-service access to the organization via web dashboards, BI tools, and other resources
Provide quick turnaround responses to specific ad-hoc data inquiries, digging into discrepancies and inconsistencies
(Management) Leading and improving analytical programs and communicating the results of your business unit/category/region to leaders including conducting consumer research
Architect the next generation of integrations between our data platforms to drive more activation and value from the available data resources.
Bring the promise of data science and machine learning to reality within Marketing Analytics, increasing decision effectiveness and speed.
Deliver analytic insights in several business domains including financial, customer, market share, consumer
Define the roadmap for Data Warehouse Analytics, including metrics, dimensions, data access guidelines, and collaborate closely with the Data Warehouse Engineering team to ensure successful execution
Utilize analytics to conceptualize ideas, justify business cases, and manage the implementation of improvements to enhance the customer experience
Lead and manage our Analytics team and Data Warehouse Analytics team, ensuring their effective functioning and growth
Develop in-depth business, analytical, and systems knowledge to improve/build analytical solutions, approaches and business recommendations
With a combination of analytical expertise, data and system knowledge and business insight, you’ll answer and anticipate critical business questions and opportunities and deliver insights to the business in ways that make significant impacts
Working with product owners, channel leads, merchandising, and IT to identify tagging needs and reporting requirements to improve the implementation and usage of various digital analytics tools.
Keep a pulse on performance metrics and KPIs. You will be positioned to have a view of the business, product and member base and encouraged to understand and explain trends.
Sound statistical inference skills, with the ability to communicate uncertainty appropriately to business stakeholders.
Ask why a lot. Your proactive inquisitiveness, supported by your data dexterity, means you’re leading first-of-its-kind analyses.
Solid experience analyzing data to drive insights and decision-making. First principles thinker who utilizes data effectively to drive insights and decision-making. 
Data Analysis and Insights:
Lead the team in analyzing user data to uncover patterns, trends, and user behaviors that inform product growth opportunities
Conduct cohort analysis, user segmentation, and funnel analysis to identify areas for optimization and growth
A/B Testing and Experimentation:
Assist with and oversee measurement of A/B testing initiatives to validate hypotheses and optimize product features and user experiences
Collaborate with cross-functional teams to design and analyze experiments, interpreting results to drive data-driven decisions
Metrics & Measurement Strategy
Define metrics and measurements of success for engaging providers
Brainstorm innovative measurement and attribution strategies for new initiatives
Develop and maintain datasets, KPIs, and reporting tools for the entire Marketing organization
Co-initiate and help implement new reporting structures or refine existing structures within your area of responsibility in alignment with Global Digital Analytics Frameworks and Data Governance. 
Help define key performance indicators across the business
Provide subject matter expertise to assist in metric definition and right KPIs to measure performance and plan for future
Own and track corporate and functional metrics for Sales, including the market opportunity, funnel dynamics, conversion rates, sales production, pricing/discounts, and account growth
Identify key success indicators and establish best practices for measurement and reporting purposes
Partner with other measurement analysts to understand and quantify how web strategy and integrated marketing strategy work together to move sellers through the funnel
Own tracking logic and methodology for measurement of marketing and customer clusters
Define key metrics used to measure the success of our business strategies and develop dashboards and ongoing reporting to surface insights and drive decision-making
Collaborate with stakeholders to define web page objectives and develop comprehensive measurement plans and KPIs to ensure results are measurable, actionable, and aligned with page goals
Own measurement, benchmarking, deep dive analysis, and ad hoc support for our marketing web strategy initiatives
Drive planning processes and keep a pulse on the latest measurement methodologies and tools to aid in defining web strategy and optimizations
Develop effective measurement frameworks and reports for non-technical audiences to enable actionable insights to improve seller’s onsite experience and aid in moving sellers through the funnel
Work with our analytics, design technology, and data engineering teams to ensure measurement capabilities are in place prior to new page launches
Familiarity with web testing platforms like Optimizely + GrowthBook and the ability to assist stakeholders with optimal web A/B testing set up
Deep experience working with web measurement tools like Google Analytics (including GA4), ContentSquare, and FullStory, and robust understanding of web measurement and web metric definition best practices
5+ years of experience in developing web measurement solutions from beginning to end to support web strategy including developing measurement best practices, metrics delivery, developing actionable insights, and integrating with other data initiatives. 
Prior experience utilizing a third party web analytics platform (Google Analytics preferred) to understand web behavior and conversion attribution
Co-lead establishing experimental frameworks. Analyze complex retail data to provide recommendations A/B and multivariate tests as well as optimization measurement support.
MLT understanding of key performance metrics and campaign ROI
Stakeholder satisfaction with timely output of a continuous performance reporting model of the marketing analytics pillar team
Effectiveness/accuracy of key insights reporting capabilities
Ability to up level digital performance measurement and analytics / insights driven decision making at the tactical level
Ability to drive data driven decision making and shape a data driven culture
Timely completion of regular tasks on budget for the team
Monitor programs & metrics, identify risks, and proactively implement solutions to ensure successful outcomes.
Build, monitor and report on critical success metrics and communicate meaningful insights internally.
You will identify the right metrics for success, use appropriate analytic methodologies to assess the true impact of marketing programs, and make business strategy recommendations
Standardize and manage a multi-touch attribution model and provide recommendations and insights
Produce meaningful marketing KPI dashboards and delivering proactive, cross-channel performance reports with actionable insights
Build a multi-touch attribution model that measures marketing activities to understand the recipe that closes a deal
Data Management, Infrastructure, Models, and Quality
(ETL) Streamline processes with third party marketing partners and data providers
(Infrastructure) Define instrumentation standards for product analytics
(Infrastructure) Craft and maintain data infrastructure with the Data Engineering team by translating business requirements from business partners to data models that will enable reporting, dashboards, and segmentation; responsible for data integrity
(Modeling) Perform impact analysis and modeling for a variety of different marketing initiatives and projects 
(Governance) Oversee data governance, definition management and quality control
(Modeling) Develop a deep understanding of the work of our stakeholders on the product development, clinical, finance, and commercial teams so that you can build the dimensional models, actionable metrics, and documents that will inform how they use data
(Modeling) Architect and manage our production data models in Snowflake and how they are consumed in Looker. The technologies we use are Fivetran, dbt, Snowflake, Looker, and PostgreSQL
(Documentation) Author design documents that resolve technical complexity, as well as instructional materials and semantic layer content that ensures data consumers arrive at the correct answers
(ETL) Lead cross-functional projects from the ingestion of a new data source to polished metrics and dashboards
(Governance) Own data governance and management across all related data systems and warehouse infrastructure
Own the following areas within Data and Analytics department: Data Collection, Data Analysis, Competitive Research, Providing Recommendations, Reporting and Visualization
Design, implement, and maintain data pipelines leveraging multiple data sources
Ensure the optimization, scalability, and resilience of data extraction, transformation, and load (ETL) processes
Manage and maintain on-prem data infrastructure, ensuring high availability, security, and performance
Worked with data science and engineering teams guiding and assisting in the building of machine learning-based forecasting & optimization models
Developed marketing analytics frameworks for reporting and analysis through building and implementing improved data infrastructure and ETL pipelines
Managed the development and automation of split (a/b) & multivariate testing environments, including ideation, creation, estimations, and measurement strategies
Identify and deliver on analytical needs in the digital environment, especially about appropriate dashboards, tagging, and reporting
Provided development support for data preparation, wrangling, and cleansing (w/ Python, Tableau Prep) for new data pipelines for marketing insights
Operationalizing the finalized insights and deploying them into production environments; monitoring performance and making continuous improvements to maintain metric health
Strong knowledge of programming fundamentals, with an emphasis on code simplicity and performance
Execute assigned projects in areas such as analytics implementation, database integration, tag management, qualitative data, etc. 
Committed to continuous improvement, with a passion for building processes/tools to make everyone more efficient
Construct an efficient digital demand generation tech stack to engage prospects effectively across digital channels. 
Create models that will help design the right set of product led growth (PLG) experiments or analyses to evaluate the success of new features, and other products
Contribute to and advocate for coding best practices, robust documentation, and continuous improvement in data engineering practices
Develop deep segmentation of our database in partnership with our sales and strategy teams
Extensive experience in building and managing complex data pipelines and ETL processes, with proficiency in SQL, Python, or other relevant programming languages. 
Completes work assignments and supports business-specific projects by applying expertise in subject area; supporting the development of work plans to meet business priorities and deadlines; ensuring team follows all procedures and policies; coordinating resources to accomplish priorities and deadlines; collaborating cross-functionally to make effective business decisions; solving complex problems; escalating high priority issues or risks as appropriate; and recognizing and capitalizing on improvement opportunities
Gathers data and information on targeted variables in an established systematic fashion by validating data sources; querying, merging, and extracting data across sources; completing routine data refresh and update; developing and/or delivering tools for electronic data collection; and providing user training, support, and documentation
Develops analytical and/or statistical models enabling informed business decisions by determining data and analytical requirements; creating models leading to actionable insights; and testing, refining, and validating models
Prepares data for analytic efforts by integrating and consolidating data; ensuring data quality and accuracy; profiling data inaccuracies and recommending process improvements or system changes to enhance overall quality of the data; and cleaning and creating final data set(s) for analysis
Expertise in SQL - you innately translate business questions to queries, understand the edge cases of joins, and with dexterity explore a warehouse to find data most appropriate to the problem.
Familiarity with R or python - you write reproducible code and have a tendency toward automation.
Work with the BI and Data Engineering teams to build out our data pipeline and feedback loops
Own data models, dashboards, and other data artifacts with a responsibility to keep them up-to-date
Uncover insights that help us understand our customers better
Build collaborative, influential relationships and processes with cross functional teams such as Business Intelligence (BI), Business Systems, Data Engineering, Finance, and more.
Data Quality and Governance:
Ensure data integrity and accuracy by implementing robust data governance practices
Collaborate with data engineering teams to establish data pipelines and ensure the availability of clean and reliable data
Marketing (Acquisition) Strategy & Management
Brainstorm, size, and test growth opportunities across marketing channels
Be a strategic thought partner to marketing and own key areas of Life Cycle
Marketing end-to-end, including optimizing Lifecycle Marketing strategy
Own and build marketing predictive models to drive marketing efficiency across lifecycle, paid marketing, and integrated strategy
Identify, analyze, and interpret trends or patterns in complex data sets to develop a thorough understanding of our products, subscribers, users, and acquisition channels
Develop metrics and frameworks to inform the scope, prioritization, and resourcing of initiatives
Ensure accuracy of inputs by working with the FMMs to streamline and centralize the campaign creation process and design exception reporting to catch errors before they reach the reporting stage
Develop and use experiments and marketing attribution models to analyze and simulate the incremental impact of media and marketing for a retail business 
Identify and evaluate opportunities for marketing efficiency and effectiveness optimization within, and across channels 
Lead marketing forecasting exercises to help understand potential, risk, and required investments to achieve growth targets 
Architect the next generation of integrations between our data platforms to drive more activation and value from the available data resources.
Monitor budget distribution and performance of paid channels
Forecasting consumer and sales trends
Monitoring the efficacy of marketing trends through analytical tools and software
Manage creation of sales and marketing metrics reports and dashboards to track performance
Deliver end-to-end analysis to influence marketing strategy by carrying out statistical or data-driven analysis that proves causality of marketing actions
Self starter and fast learner who thrives in a rapidly changing environment and gets things done
Comfortable dealing with ambiguous problems and experimenting with different approaches
Familiarity with organic and paid marketing initiatives including understanding how different traffic source channels have divergent behavior and needs
Demonstrated track record of driving innovation and continuous improvement in marketing analytics, staying updated with industry best practices and emerging trends. 
Strong business acumen, with the ability to understand the broader impact of marketing analytics on company performance and make data-driven decisions. 
Proven track record and significant experience in marketing analytics, with a focus on eCommerce and digital marketing, including experience in a leadership role. 
Create Marketing Analytics products with maximum adoption from the stakeholders (measured by reach and frequency), user satisfaction, and business impact
Closely partner with marketing, product, engineering, research, and design to translate your insights into action - you will have a seat at the table to drive roadmap development.
Research and support ideation, brainstorming, and prioritization process with quantitative data.
Identify and resolve challenges and conflicts within the demand generation process. 
Provide training and support to team members on demand generation best practices and tools. 
Design, plan, manage, and optimize integrated digital campaigns across multiple channels to generate pipeline. 
Monitor and report campaign performance with detailed tracking across relevant KPIs, including impressions, clicks, web visitors, video views, collateral downloads, leads, initial sales conversions, and revenue. 
Create impactful nurture programs to enhance conversion rates from leads to opportunities. 
Work closely with the CMO and Director of Content and Communication for granular tracking, reporting, and efficient lead management during the handoff from marketing to sales. 
Extensive experience in the development of creative campaigns and execution of email marketing, social advertising, content syndication, SEM, and paid digital. 
Strong reporting capabilities with the ability to track campaign performance and associated spend down to the most granular details while providing roll-up reporting to senior management
Become an expert in our data and systems. You should be able to get the underlying data for all of our customers & products.
Generate insights and recommendations for how we should drive growth in those businesses.
Understand key company and Go To Market team objectives. Use this understanding to prioritize the many programs being run by the teams we support.
In some cases you will be responsible for the execution of key programs. You will need to build strong relationships with our GTM leaders and drive those programs to completion.
In other cases you will be responsible for delegating this work and providing coaching to our analyst team to ensure the program is seen through to completion.
Management & Team Leadership
This person will manage a team of 3 digital marketing specialists however the main areas of focus for this person will be to manage all aspects of organic SEO: technical, analytical, testing, etc.
Acquisition & User Growth Strategy & Management
			Paid Acquisition & Performance Marketing (PAPM)
Strategy & Planning Management
You will work alongside our CMO and their leads to play a crucial role in setting our marketing strategy in this period of high growth, while taking our marketing analytics efforts to the next level.
Work closely with the CMO on annual and quarterly forecasting, budget planning, target/KPI setting, which includes close collaboration with Finance, Data Engineering, Biz Ops, and the rest of the Growth/Marketing team to ensure alignment with overall business objectives
Be responsible for MQLs and pipelines driven by your segment, laddering to the team’s overall demand generation goals. 
Tailor tentpole demand generation campaigns to create more personalized touchpoints for your audience, creating and capturing demand.
Align with stakeholders to assess needs, build a roadmap for new technology and capability development
Lead the strategy and execution to attract target functional personas, including messaging and promo plans.
Develop programs that enable uptake of attribution solutions, identify blockers to implementation and work cross functionally to resolve these
Develop thought leadership around key product launches and ins response to industry developments partnering closely with the Global Business Marketing team
Define go-to-market strategy for TikTok's Performance Measurement products. Our team is instrumental in setting go-to-market strategy and ensuring flawless execution and operations against the strategy.
Manage relationships with paid search platforms and partners to improve campaign results and stay informed about industry trends.
Evaluate new technologies and/or beta opportunities for paid search and provide recommendations for adoption
Build new processes for paid search testing and campaign launches
Own and optimize the paid search budget, ensuring return on investment and c/per threshold baselines are met
Keep abreast of the latest digital advertising trends, tools, and best practices.
Identify the key performance indicators that will drive our paid search success and hold the team accountable to hitting those key performance indicators.
Develop and implement a comprehensive global paid search strategy, aligning it with the company's business objectives and marketing goals.
You will ensure traffic, revenue, ad spend, CAC, ROI/ROAS metrics are within or exceed targets. 
Budget Management: Allocate and manage campaign budgets to ensure maximum ROI.
You will manage multi-million-dollar budget and relationships with agencies to ensure flawless planning and execution; pushing the agencies to elevate performance, continue innovation and rethinking to advance media performance to industry-leading levels. 
Stay up to date on industry trends, algorithm changes, and new technologies. Apply the latest best practices in paid search marketing to our campaigns.
Manage the allocation and optimization of advertising budgets to maximize ROI. Implement effective bidding strategies to meet performance goals.
Develop innovative online programs for major campaigns, product launches, and events.
Advertising Strategy & Execution: Design, develop, and deploy strategies and campaigns.
Stay abreast of the latest modals and capabilities and ensure we are always first to test any new medium.
Collaborate and align with stakeholders across partnerships, operations, policy and strategy to make sure plans and projects are holistics, integrated, and communicated accordingly
Strategy and opportunity sizing: Conducting ad-hoc analytical projects to support strategic opportunities such as market mapping, and quarterly initiatives, while proactively keeping an eye out for the next big 1, 3, 5 year opportunity to propose back to the business
Strategic presentations: Preparing executive-level presentations that clearly and succinctly communicate and explain the overall health and success of Homebase’s marketing efforts, from ad-hoc analytical projects to board presentations.
Create and implement comprehensive performance outreach strategies that align with our business goals. This includes identifying target audiences, setting clear objectives, and choosing the most effective digital channels
Own market research to measure marketing campaigns, market expansion and identify new growth opportunities 
Build, implement, and optimize a comprehensive growth marketing plan to drive measurable results towards Wing’s business goals
Understanding our Ideal Customer Profile and personas to develop messaging, programs and sequences in partnership with other marketing teams to activate a variety of channels such as digital marketing, email marketing, social media, partners and events to drive SQLs
Driving effective communication with and through your team to multiple stakeholders, including executives, sales, portfolio marketing, and the extended GTM team. Participate in regional pipeline and business reviews. 
Analytics & Reporting Management
Owning and driving weekly, monthly, and quarterly reporting to team and executives, while helping the team understand results and uncover insights. This could include chairing regular performance status meetings, owning the floor, keeping the larger team on track, and driving accountability and action plans
Provide regular insights and recommendations based on campaign results.
Collaborate with performance marketing to design and execute experiments, incrementality testing, media mix modeling, & spend ROI curves
Drive insights, identify opportunities, and understand behavior and long-term trends that meaningfully impact OpenStore’s business
Work with engineering to build and evolve our data infrastructure to surface key metrics through automated dashboards and reports
Lead the development of models and predictive KPIs to improve the targeting and creative engines across marketing channels
Be a power user and admin in multiple technologies in the tagging, tracking, web, and ad operations stack
Ensure the web tracking and ad technologies are efficiently designed to run marketing campaigns aligned with business goals
Partner closely with the Sales and Marketing Science teams to deeply understand user pain points, form business requirements and prioritize solutions to influence the direction of product development.
Deliver reporting, insights and forecasts that measures channel performance on a daily through annual basis
Act as an active voice in defining our tracking architecture to maximize our data usage in audience creation and campaign optimization
Evaluate and adopt our paid search technology stack to improve campaign efficiency and performance.
Analyze channel-level and cloud-specific key performance indicators dashboards to determine opportunities for growth or efficiency
Analyze datasets to understand our paid marketing funnel and identify opportunities for improvement
Working closely with marketing analytics, you will use historical data, industry benchmarks, and past experience to develop models and provide performance projections to key collaborators
Monitor performance metrics and budget tracking while ensuring findings are shared and coordinated into the team's workflow
 You will utilize analytics data to provide actionable insight into what is happening with campaigns and why it is happening – and to recommend courses of action to improve metrics. 
Generate and present regular reports on campaign performance, insights, and recommendations.
Performance Analysis: Monitor and analyze campaign performance using tools like Google Ads, Facebook Ads, GA4, AppsFlyer, etc.
Regularly generate reports on campaign performance, highlighting key metrics and insights.Use data to provide actionable recommendations for campaign improvements.
Audit and analysis of current digital advertising channels or programs.
Marketing attribution: Own and operationalize a marketing attribution framework for a growing team, including getting Exec and Finance alignment on attribution philosophy. Implement this by measuring the efficacy and performance of marketing channels (paid, organic, brand, email, chat, website (direct), social, etc). This includes collaborating with our data, engineering, marketing and Biz Ops teams to evaluate and onboard the right vendors and tools as well as daily grooming/management, i.e. ensuring accurate data flowing to and from our database
Monitor, analyze, and report KPIs to ensure marketing initiatives reach revenue objectives
Deeply assess the user and customer journey to identify, champion, and drive the cross-functional execution and elevation of personalization capabilities that will yield greater leverage and scale in the business
Perform strategic product, market, and customer analyses to uncover high-potential user segments and better understand their needs, identify new growth drivers or opportunities for improvement, and uncover and leverage new emerging channels to better personalize and accelerate user time to value
Expand performance analytics reporting using the Sigma product and use data to drive insights into actions.
Support broader measurement initiatives across the organization, providing guidance and/or requirements to ensure data accuracy.
Regularly analyse campaign data to evaluate their effectiveness. Provide detailed reports on key metrics making recommendations for improvement
Utilize data-driven insights to make informed marketing decisions and continuously refine strategies
Regularly audit web analytics implementation to ensure data accuracy, and work with development teams to address issues and/or recommend new tracking capabilities.
Tracking, analyzing and leveraging emerging marketing tactics and driving innovative end-to-end lifecycle programs that deliver leads, unlock the middle of the funnel and accelerate pipeline. Continually drive conversion rate optimization. Ensure that marketing performance and impact inform the go-forward strategy. Utilize a ‘test and learn’ approach to optimization.
Develop standardized reporting for overall website performance and business goals/objectives.
 Work with stakeholders to understand their objectives, and develop relevant dashboards and/or reporting mechanisms to ensure they can accurately measure and optimize towards goals.
Oversee performance marketing channels, including advancing and optimizing Wing’s martech stack
Split Testing & Optimization
Develop and execute various website tests to drive acquisition, engagement, and traffic improvements.
Craft compelling ad copy and perform A/B testing to improve click-through rates and conversions. Continuously analyze ad performance and make data-driven improvements.
Drive optimization via experimentation on our paid landing pages in close collaboration with our design, website, and analytics teams
Support in the development of new landing pages and digital touchpoints to supplement the customer journey of your acquisition campaigns
Team Management & Leadership Collaboration
People management: Managing and mentoring our marketing analyst, providing guidance, feedback, and support in their professional development
Partner with Marketing leadership to develop an analytics roadmap and help build a rigorous culture of data-driven decision making
Communicate the value proposition of new performance measurement products to all stakeholders and ensure that effective collateral and packages are created 
Work with channel owners in other marketing teams to extend awareness and engagement within your segment through campaigns and ads.
Work with the B2B content team to create reports, infographics, blog posts, and emails that resonate with your target audience and drive top-of-funnel engagement.
Facilitate collaboration among different departments to ensure that the growth strategies are integrated and effective across the whole customer journey
Collaborate with the team to ideate and build high-performing offers and campaigns. 
Lead day-to-day communication with agencies, third-party vendors and key partners (e.g. resolve issues, document challenges, build roadmaps, facilitate collaborative brainstorming sessions, etc.)
Collaborate cross functionally with Marketing, Product, Finance, Data Science, Creative and Engineering to thoughtfully scale acquisition efforts
Present regular reports to senior executives and stakeholders, illustrating the impact of paid search efforts on key performance indicators and business outcomes.
Lead a team of paid search experts, providing guidance, mentoring, and encouraging a culture of continuous learning and innovation.
Streamline the process from key stakeholder requests to campaign creation to the reporting back on those results
Partner with finance, analytics, and marketing operations to utilize our marketing technology stack and data to understand campaign effectiveness and ROI
Collaboration & Reporting: Collaborate with marketing, design, and brand teams to ensure alignment in strategy and messaging.
Work collaboratively with our Product Marketing and Product teams to align messaging and understand relevant product launches and moments to roll into each customer program or campaign
Partner with other growth marketers, Analytics, Marketing Operations, Growth Product, Developer Relations, and Product Marketing to accelerate time to value for MongoDB Atlas users through the creation of personalized digital experiences
Leading a team of Demand Gen marketers and being a trusted partner to the regional sales leadership team by understanding and supporting the needs of each region through careful and calculated planning of marketing tactics and programs that accelerate deal velocity. 
Work with a cross-functional team of Content Marketers, UX Designers, Product Managers, Web Developers, Data Scientists, and peer marketing teams to maintain alignment on website measurement and performance.
Collaborate closely with the Growth Product team to optimize user onboarding, engagement, habit, and usage, and continuously optimize programs and channels through new surface areas, experiments and A/B tests
Partner with internal teams (Design, Content, Revenue Operations, Product Marketing, Marketing Analytics) to strengthen the efficacy of our performance marketing programs
Campaign Management & Optimization (Channels)
Oversee campaigns across platforms like Google, X, Youtube, Instagram, LinkedIn, and others. Responsible for ad creation, bidding strategies, and performance optimization
Create a streamlined process for continuously creating, launching and testing new ads and messaging campaigns
Own and manage our paid social (Meta, LinkedIn) marketing channels and budget, ensuring we hit our monthly cost and volume goals
Manage our paid media budget, determining optimal spend allocation across channels based on our goals
Efficiently manage the outreach budget to maximize ROI. Allocate funds strategically across various channels and campaigns working in close partnership with the Growth Outreach team
Manage an SEO team to grow organic traffic to the website and ensure those efforts align with SEM efforts. Partner with the Content Programs team for all web content purposes
You will lead the overall paid media strategy and drive customer traffic, conversion, and ROI for all media channels (search, social, display, video, programmatic, retail trade media, TV, radio, and streaming media channels). 
 You will work with the agency to optimize marketing campaigns to meet and/or exceed Dexcom’s goals through channel-specific levers, including but not limited to keyword research & analysis, bid adjustments & automation, affiliate CPA changes, budget allocation, A/B testing, placement testing, product feed. 
Develop and implement comprehensive paid search strategies aligned with our business objectives. Conduct detailed keyword research, competitor analysis, and audience segmentation.
Build and maintain partnerships with external vendors and collaborate internally to ensure that outreach initiatives are well-supported and integrated within the broader organizational strategy
Directly manage our digital channels such as Google Ads, Linkedin, 6Sense, and more. 
Continuously monitor bid adjustments and optimize spend across different channels.
Build and evolve the keyword strategy for both paid and organic to increase the share of organically sourced inquiries.
Build and run paid search campaigns on platforms such as Google Ads and Microsoft Ads. Set up, optimize, and monitor ad campaigns, ad groups, and keywords for optimal performance.
Define and implement our strategy for paid acquisition across other growth channels, including but not limited to: social, display, affiliate, and other PPC/PPL programs
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)








			Organic Acquisition & User Growth (OAUG)
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
Strategy & Planning Management
Develops and implements marketing plans to serve the business objectives.
Ensures that project/department milestones/goals are met and adhering to approved budgets.
Develop and Execute SEO Strategy: Formulate comprehensive SEO strategies to increase organic traffic, improve search rankings, and drive conversions for our digital properties.
Stay Abreast of Industry Trends: Keep up to date with the latest SEO trends, algorithm updates, and emerging technologies to implement cutting-edge strategies.
Develop and execute comprehensive SEO strategy aligned with business objectives.
Plan, develop and implement the overall SEO strategy for Resident, across on and off page content, and technical SEO
Prioritize and manage SEO roadmap, ensuring timely and effective implementation.
Execute and be accountable for the success of go-to-market campaigns 
Maintain up-to-date knowledge of broader SEO community including updates to SEO and analytics platforms as well as updates done by key search engines; must keep client websites up to date to ensure peak performance in lead generation
Present SEO roadmap, performance, and plans to stakeholders and executive team.
Drive the SEO optimization strategies to maximize reach to Shipt’s target audience via an increase in search engine results on key branded and nonbranded terms. Define measurable goals and tracking progress, translating the strategy to tactical workstreams with the team. Partner cross functionally to bring strategies to life with a clear vision 
A successful person in this role will have effective interpersonal skills, an understanding of intent frameworks and a real passion for SEO. 
Own development and communication of the long-term vision, goals, and roadmap for the integrated growth marketing strategy for SafeBase
Serves as a key member of client marketing team, to develop and inform best digital marketing campaign strategy to achieve desired outcomes; depending on nature of client campaign, may have to develop project plan and serve as the key project manager; ensuring on time and quality delivery
Establish program KPI’s and drive execution to achieve quarterly revenue and customer goals to support overall company growth targets
Stay updated with industry trends, algorithm updates, and competition.
Provide recommendations and execute/manage strategies for content development in coordination with SEO goals; both general and keyword specific
Stay updated with industry trends, search engine algorithm updates, and best practices to stay ahead of the competition.
Build a best-in-class SEO practice across technical and content SEO across our web properties, including brand and content sites we manage.
Stay up to date with the latest SEO and digital marketing latest trends and best practices, and communicate those to key stakeholders
Manage the SEO meeting cadence to enable the rhythm of the Owned business, including leadership reviews and all hands team meetings
You will provide clear prioritization and rationale for your initiatives, and will listen and carefully consider your partner’s needs and objectives in order to find common solutions that meet the needs of the Resident business and customers
Develop and execute comprehensive global SEO strategies to improve organic search visibility and rankings, drive targeted traffic, and achieve business goals.
Build and execute a go-to-market strategy and innovative programs that position Snowflake’s developer experiences 
Build “Executive ready” project deliverables and provide constant and clear communication of objectives, status and results to all relevant stakeholders at various levels of the organization for key projects
Participate in Annual Planning with cross-functional connection points, trend identification, plan development and analysis, including resource planning
VP Requirements
Own and optimize the digital marketing/ demand generation function to scale ticket sales to SaaStr in-person and digital events (tickets - paid)
Meet and exceed the attendee and revenue goals per event by executing marketing campaigns across organic and paid marketing channels, including but not limited to: email marketing, paid acquisition, re-targeting, outbound, etc. 
Own our full-funnel marketing strategy, including increasing our conversion rates from entrance to goal (net new names + free digital events tix)
Management & Engagement Style
Creative problem solving, with an ability to thrive in fast-paced and ambiguous environments, juggle multiple initiatives successfully, and show adeptness at leveraging data to inform recommendations
Both big-picture thinking and hands-on, attention to detail, with a bias for action
Strong sense of urgency and ability to turn projects around quickly
Ability to thrive in a fast-paced and ambiguous environment
Ability to manage and drive cross-functional work
Customer Targets & Markets
Continually develop customer insight to shape growth strategies, funnel optimization & cross-sell
VP Requirements
Develop and optimize a first-class digital experience for our community with clear digital journeys and revenue targets for key personas in target verticals. Including building out the entire funnel, from re-defining marketable names acquisition models to paid conversion strategies
Financial Planning & Budgeting
Own planning & budgeting of financials & metrics for web traffic, conversion
Support strategic & financial decision making as it relates to marketing
Continually make and implement recommendations for optimizing programs, and additional investment in time and money in line with strategic direction
Build a holistic view and understanding of the marketing spend, channel performance and attribution.
Support the SEO budget management to include forecasting and invoice management. Help to track monthly expense variances to optimize forecasting practices and enable spend accountability. Manage any external providers.
Own the pipeline number to define our demand generation strategy and channel mix to drive net new logo acquisition and marketing sourced revenue
Competitive Insights & Tracking
Competitive Analysis: Analyze competitors' SEO strategies to identify strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities to maintain a competitive advantage.
Develop market/competitive intelligence, acting as our thought leader and expert 
Stay informed of competitive trends and support the creation of competitive assessments to aid in developing near-mid-long term strategies
Keep up with industry trends, search engine algorithm updates, competitive landscape
UI/UX & Funnel Optimization
Drive performance through constantly testing new strategies (segmentation, messaging, navigation, design, content etc) and building a hypothesis driven test and learn discipline 
Develop, manage and execute end to end customer experience on web and mobile
Develop and execute an end to end customer journey experience on web & search, based on enterprise wide customer personas / segments
Own and execute landing page strategies for acquisition and lifecycle programs 
Data-driven decision-making, experience analyzing insights to inform web strategies and testing roadmaps, with hands-on experience performing A/B tests, lift measurement studies, running experiments at scale, and managing related testing tools.
Experience building the strategy for and executing customer lifecycle programs with strong results
Growth → A/B Testing
Develop & execute SEO & CRO programs to meet new customer growth / ROI targets
Build clear, succinct story & actionable recommendations on results and how to improve them 
Plan and execute A/B tests, evaluate results, and drive improvements.
Proven track record of generating and converting organic traffic to deliver growth at a DTC brand through highly scalable SEO initiatives
Develop mechanisms to build audiences and segments to optimize channel and campaign performance.
Design robust experiments including incrementality tests and measure the tests with actionable metrics and learnings. 
VP Requirements
Develop and lead SEM strategy for Web & Desktop on global and regional KPIs
Manage performance metrics and budget tracking while sharing learnings cross functionally
Serve as the central point of contact for all marketing initiatives, including defining scope of work, negotiating contracts and overseeing overall relationships at the most senior level
Report to the CEO and support the continuous improvement on strategy, plans, and processes for the company’s growth marketing operations
Content Strategy & Architecture w/ Keyword Optimization
Advanced experience with keyword research and writing compelling, keyword-rich, ‘within brand guidelines’ title tags, meta descriptions and other copy in collaboration with multiple teams for input on high visibility pages.
Keyword Research and Analysis: Conduct thorough keyword research, competitor analysis, and user intent research to identify high-value target keywords and create content optimization plans.
Define and implement a strategic content roadmap for Experience Cloud on Business.Adobe.com
Experience working with Editorial Content teams and agencies to build compelling SEO content
Create and oversee SEO-driven content plans to enhance authority and rankings.
Educate product, design and development teams and partners on current industry trends, SEO and content methodologies. 
You have deep knowledge in SEO from content strategies to technical audits.
Perform keyword research in coordination with client business objectives to optimize existing content and uncover new opportunities
Content Strategy Alignment: Collaborate with the content team to ensure SEO best practices are incorporated into content creation and distribution efforts to maximize organic visibility.
Conduct ongoing keyword research, identify opportunities, and benchmark against competitors.
Conduct in-depth keyword research, competitor analysis, and market research to identify opportunities and trends.
Demonstrated experience in SEO fundamentals and understanding of the interaction between site architecture and content to deliver organic traffic performance.
Create crisp and compelling messaging, content assets, sales enablement, and more to be used by Snowflake marketing and sales teams, as well as partner teams 
Technical Optimization & Tracking
Deep technical SEO expertise optimizing code, site architecture, internal links, subdomains, and cross-domain with strong collaborations skills that can move projects along in partnership with multiple teams.
Ensure technical SEO best practices are implemented, including site structure and speed, crawlability, and mobile optimization.
On-page and Technical Optimization: Optimize website content and structure for search engines, focusing on metadata, URL structures, internal linking, and other technical SEO elements.
Apply advanced technical SEO concepts for recommendations and optimizations.
You are comfortable with documentation to define SEO strategies and technical SEO requirements.
You’ll ensure the index is healthy and crawls are efficient and focused on the highest value pages
Experience with the technical aspects of running a website, including web analytics, UX, technical and content SEO, domain management, programmatic SEO, HTML/CSS/JavaScript, and A/B testing, and other web platform tools. Wordpress experience is a plus.
Product Strategy & Growth (w/ PLG)
Develop end to end customer experience for new product launches, policy & feature updates
VP Requirements
Responsible for defining product strategy for search marketing, such as executing automated bidding, building systems for millions of keywords, audience building and landing pages in a profitable manner
Collaborate with product, engineering and data science partners to build and run experiments and utilize in-house ad technology
Partnering with data science, product, engineering and design, lead the ideation and execution of product improvements which can drive growth
Define use cases which can lead to product changes
Analytics & Measurement (w/ Tooling)
Constantly monitor traffic, funnel conversion, page performance metrics and ROI to deliver improved performance
Analyze website performance data using tools like Google Analytics and SEMrush to identify areas for improvement and growth.
Drive metrics standardization and build consensus with marketing and other stakeholders.
Drive data modeling requirements for analytics and data engineers.
Continuously identify new SEO growth opportunities by analyzing existing content architecture, keyword constructs, audits and data/traffic analysis. 
Identify opportunities to develop high potential staff through involvement in new projects, expanded accountabilities, promotions, and/or transfers
Work with Consumer Insights, Experience and Data Science to understand the consumer base, roadblocks and opportunities for a data-driven strategy and tactics
Monitor and evaluate web analytics, dashboards, reports, search results and overall performance across the major search channels in order to improve rankings
Monitor daily performance metrics to understand SEO strategy performance
Provide SEO analysis and recommendations in coordination with elements and structure of websites and web pages
Establish Looker as a primary data reporting and analytics tool. Build modular data models in Looker for efficient and sophisticated data analysis. 
Explore, validate, and build high value datasets to power business intelligence and marketing strategies.
Support analysis and monitoring of business metrics and trends.
Evaluate strategies and forecast their expected impact to the key performance indicators.
Actively mine data to develop actionable insights from our proprietary datasets using various statistical techniques.
You have hands-on experience with SEO and web analytic tools such as Google Analytics, Mode, Looker, Search Console, SEMRush, Ahrefs, Dragon Metrics, Screamingfrog and Deepcrawl.
Iterate on our complex channel attribution logic and methodologies; make sure they are up-to-date and effective as we grow.
Monitor and report on key performance indicators related to organic search traffic, rankings, and conversion rates. Generate regular reports to communicate progress and insights to stakeholders.
Manage Traffic, CR, CAC, ROI, volume & revenue targets; Own key reports around Customer Traffic, Website Performance, conversion rates, and SEO / CRO program performance; Keep key stakeholders updated with daily, weekly, and monthly reporting
You come with exceptional analytical skills and comfortable using data to guide decision making.
Serve as a leader for a team of SEO experts, aiding in career development and coaching
Serve as an evangelist for SEO across our brands, working with cross-functional teams to instill SEO best practices, update processes, and improve communication
Track and report on rankings, traffic, and funnel metrics.
Partner with research & analytics in applying qualitative & quantitative methods with rigorous A/B testing to understand traffic and conversion drivers
Strong SEO analysis with a hard-core data background. Highly analytical, makes data-driven decisions and experienced with working in an organization with rigorous testing standards.
Performance Tracking and Reporting: Monitor SEO performance using various analytics tools and prepare regular reports showcasing key metrics and progress towards SEO goals.
Website Audits and Recommendations: Conduct regular SEO audits to identify issues, provide actionable recommendations, and ensure compliance with search engine guidelines.
Own product KPI’s taking responsibility for their growth, decline, and overall health. Be fluent in KPI movement, able to speak to changes and always focused on their improvement.
Lead the selection and management of external tools & partner ecosystem
Key liaison between business and technical teams in managing day to day data analytics.
Implement and administer search engine programs (XML sitemaps and webmaster tools)
Monitor, track and report on SEO projects; specifically status, lead generation, conversion and optimization results
Identify new search engine and conversion rate optimization strategies, tests and reports
VP Requirements
Identify growth opportunities based on data mining and quantitative analysis, and execute on ideas to drive growth, traffic and engagement.
Understanding the business trends based on data and communicating it in simplified ways with clear actions
Working with finance to define forecast 
Communicating business trends, experiments results to finance, country managers, stakeholders and executives
Content Distribution & Promotion (Backlinks)
Identify opportunities for link building, outreach, and partnerships to enhance domain authority and off-page SEO efforts.
Collaboration & Leadership (Management)
Lead cross-functional teams and develop an effective operating rhythm to drive outcomes
Coordinates with internal cross-functional project teams to create strategic marketing plans as they relate to organic web marketing
Communicate customer requirements and provide input to product management on product enhancements and future product direction. 
Lead and educate the business on SEO best practices, keyword research processes and opportunity analyses backed by data and forecasts. 
Work cross-functionally to ideate powerful SEO initiatives that drive reach and engagement 
Collaborate cross-functionally with demand generation, content marketing, sales, product management, and other teams to build alignment around go-to-market plans for industries 
You will partner closely with the brand team to establish customer-friendly content to support your SEO efforts across our properties.
Provide coaching, constructive feedback, development opportunities, and recognition to direct reports as appropriate
Lead the SEO team with clear priorities, goals and workplans to ensure that they have the resources and support needed to be successful
Provide periodic and regular updates to team members & key partners on project status, timelines, and results. 
Partner with Paid Media and Social/Influencer team to align workstreams and content to the holistic strategy.
Manage a team of digital marketing specialists in all aspects of managerial responsibility, coaching, development, performance feedback and monitoring and assigning work
Lead a team of four analysts, setting longer-term goals and ensuring short-term operational efficiency.
You’re a well-rounded SEO that is comfortable working in cross-functional teams in a dynamic environment.
Strong leadership presence with the ability to lead, influence, and direct projects and processes across multiple teams.
Works cross-functionally with leaders on product, marketing, sales, data science, and insights to unlock new growth opportunities
Passion for understanding and advocating for customers and partners, along with a knack for building champions within internal cross-functional teams
Build, mentor and manage a team of web marketers and create a high-performance culture
Manages the marketing activities and programs for the organization.
You’re a natural leader and communicator, with proven experience leading an SEO team and rallying wider teams and departments toward large common and shared goals in the business.
Experience developing a team of direct and indirect reports of varying career levels - Demonstrated coaching skills and ability to inspire team members.
Stays abreast of changes in the marketing environment and coordinates market research projects. Selects and manages ongoing relationships with different marketing vendors.
Experience partnering with external agencies, search engine reps, and other channel leads (Paid Search, Digital Media, CRM) to drive holistic performance for new product initiatives and offer launches.
Work with eComm, Brand, Design, and Editorial teams to implement on-page content optimizations and SEO best practice.
Work with Product and Engineering teams to implement technical SEO optimizations and best practices and build a sustainable approach to building SEO as a core foundation of any new pages, features or releases.
You will partner with our Product and Engineering organization to establish an SEO-first implementation strategy that ensures best practices are implemented from design through launch.
Manages subordinate staff in the day-to-day performance of their jobs. (True first level manager.)
Experience ensuring SEO best practices are implemented at every step, including partnering with Design to influence creative, copywriters for on page copy, developers for code and platform recommendations, as well as with QA to ensure launch is successful before and after.
Manage, maintain, and own the SEO Development team’s backlog ensuring clear requirements are available, task management is up to date, standups are held and sprint plannings are organized.
Align with stakeholders and own the prioritization of feature development for the SEO development team, being in lockstep with the business owner to ensure needs are met and the program is being tooled for success.
Align with and provide strong reasoning to cross functional product teams ensuring they understand your opportunity, timeline and the value in prioritizing work required for your area.
Collaborate closely with product managers, content strategists, and designers to optimize on-page elements and create SEO-friendly web experiences.
Lead and manage a team of SEO specialists, providing guidance, mentorship, and fostering a collaborative environment.
Lead and manage a team of SEO specialists to execute successful strategies.
Foster collaboration with stakeholders and agency partners.

Product (Marketing & Growth) Strategy and Management
Lead experimental design and evaluate conversion lift experiments to optimize campaigns and measure incremental impact
Attention to detail, commitment to data accuracy and quality, and a passion for utilizing data to drive business growth. 
Design and analyze A/B experiments to determine solution effectiveness
Lead exploratory analysis uncover new areas of opportunity, generate hypotheses, and quickly assess the potential upside of a given opportunity
Provide thought leadership & strategic thinking to solve business problems by leveraging techniques such as segmentation, optimization, and advanced analytics
Hypothesize and recommend product enhancements by leveraging a deep understanding of our data, customers, and business
Enable and facilitate data-driven, decision-making processes with senior management
Partner with Product Managers and Operations to execute our roadmap and identify new opportunities for business growth
Participate in and drive regular strategic discussions aimed at diagnosing business trends, identifying, and deploying the right tools/resources to answer the most impactful questions in an efficient way
Provide strategic analytic insights and support to enhance all aspects of our businesses, including revenue optimization, A/B testing, consumer analytics/behavior, and marketing ROI analysis
Evaluating areas of improvement and business growth opportunities within our business.
Influence business strategy and product roadmaps through insightful analytics and business modeling. Be an analytical thought leader.
Providing analytics support on eCommerce KPIs to improve overall customer experience and maximize sales. Identifying customer trends. Manage the marketing attribution strategy
Work in a fast-paced environment and effectively manage time to deliver business impact in a time-efficient manner
Leading efforts in planning, designing, and coordinating ongoing and ad hoc analysis projects for Website Marketing, Merchandising and Marketing Channel teams to provide insights into user behavior
Experience driving analytics in support of an SEO program, landing page optimization, and funnel testing.
A focus on impact - you don’t stop with just recommendations but see work through to changing the business.
Intense attention to detail, highly focused on quality and accuracy of work product. Strong organization, prioritization and troubleshooting skills while juggling multiple projects. 
Lead product development: Design, build and support the Marketing Analytics products by assimilating signals from multiple sources and present the information in a user-friendly way to the stakeholders: Marketing and Brand organization, cross functional users across the company, and the leadership team.
Product Data Strategy:
Develop and execute a comprehensive data strategy focused on product growth and user engagement
Collaborate with product managers, engineers, and UX/UI designers to identify key data metrics and KPIs for measuring product performance
Act as the Product Manager for the Product Analytics stack, partnering with Data Platform Engineering and Product Engineering to pipe relevant data into destinations and consumer platforms
Performance Qualifications Backlog
5+ years of experience in marketing analytics or related highly analytical roles, preferably in a B2B SaaS or technology-driven environment with SMB/consumer facing products
Experience using paid marketing tools (e.g. Google Ads), marketing analytics and tracking tools (e.g. Google Analytics, Google Tag Manager), search and SEO tools (e.g. GSC, SEMRush, Ahrefs), data visualization tools (e.g. Looker/Tableau) as well as experience with Excel/GSheets and SQL
Deep understanding of marketing attribution models (MTA, first/last click, MMM, incrementality testing), with 2+ years of hands-on experience in measuring the efficiency of marketing activities
Strong analytical and problem-solving skills with the ability to effectively convey complex analyses to a broad set of people from different teams and levels
High comfort level with building strategic decks, from formatting to storytelling with visuals and data, for an executive audience
Experience with A/B testing, analysis, and experiment design to optimize marketing performance. Product analytics experience or past working experience with product teams preferred
Strong understanding of marketing principles and strategies, including digital and offline marketing channels, and customer lifecycle management
Track record of being entrepreneurial and a self-starter with high level of ownership: This is a new role; you won't have a playbook - you’ll get to build it!
Excellent communication and interpersonal skills with the ability to collaborate effectively with cross-functional teams and present complex ideas in a clear and concise manner
Resourceful, fundamentally curious and relentless in understanding the “why”. Possesses a sense of urgency in line with our value of “No Day Wasted”
A lover of local businesses -- supporting and building great products for them
You don’t have to have prior growth experience like this—we’ve always been a big believer in betting on slope rather than y-intercept, but we want to see either:
3+ years of growth marketing experience, or
5+ years of software engineering experience at high-growth startups
Definite bonus points if you’ve been a founder
You’re a hacker and a product thinker
You love solving puzzles, iterating, and optimizing
You’re curious, creative, and extremely self-directed
You’re fluent in Python and SQL
The real requirement here is that you’re a smart, data-driven, methodical, experiment-oriented person who is going to scrappily try a bunch of new things—and if you’re that type of person, we’re sure you can pick up whatever you need to know to interface with any of our existing systems and tools effectively
Bachelor's degree or equivalent experience in marketing, business, or a related field
5+ years working in the B2B SaaS vertical
12+ years of hands-on experience running enterprise-level paid search, at scale
Experience owning $20M+ monthly paid media budgets
Consistent track record of senior-level experience in paid search management, with significant accomplishments in driving leads, revenue, and brand visibility.
Robust experience with measuring and tying paid search keyword and campaign performance all the way thru the B2B sales funnel to closed deal
Strong, hands-on-keys expertise with Google Ads, Google Ads Editor, Microsoft Ads and Search Ads 360
The ability to build, analyze, and surface your own reports using provided tools (Google Analytics, Tableau, CRM Analytics, etc)
Proficiency in running paid search campaigns on Google Ads, Microsoft Ads and Search Ads 360. 
Strong analytical skills; the ability to interpret data to make informed decisions.
Knowledge of SEO and other digital marketing channels is advantageous.
Excellent communication skills and the ability to work collaboratively within a team.
You have 3-5+ years scaling performance marketing campaigns across major paid social platforms like Meta, LinkedIn, Twitter, TikTok, etc., and have the numbers to back it
You are highly detailed and process-oriented – you record learnings from every test, never miss a UTM, and always know how much your campaigns are spending
You don’t take no as an answer – you think there is always a way to improve performance, drive scale and lower costs with a persistent testing mentality
You are data-driven – you love to dig into the numbers and details to derive new insights and identify new opportunities
You have high critical thinking skills with a strong bias towards action
You have experience working in-house at high-growth tech companies or agency experience (a plus)
You take ownership. You are comfortable driving projects end-to-end that execute and eliminate blockers, helping you and the company move fast with confidence. You know when to raise your hand and ask for help.
You are strategic. You’re focused on where you’re going and build the strategies and plans to achieve the goal. You’re not afraid to admit something didn’t work and have backup plans brewing for your next test.
You are analytically rigorous. You have a deep bias towards using data and analyses to drive decisions. Your second language is performance KPIs and you know your numbers and the inputs needed to continue improving those KPI metrics.
You can work through ambiguity. Your experience will enable you to focus on the elements that matter most and drive clear insights that inform the team’s priorities.
3+ years of product marketing or product management experience with digital ad products
5+ years of experience in the digital advertising industry in a measurement capacity
Strong knowledge of measurement solutions and experience working on qualitative and quantitative measurement of marketing campaigns.
Excellent communication, presentation and analytical skills. Ability to build strong compelling narratives and ability to simplify marketing messaging to resonate with different audiences.
A fast learner with a good sense of judgement and original thinking. Ability to thrive in ambiguity and adjust quickly to change
Ad Attribution experience with a technology company, media agency, consulting firm preferred
Embodies our EAGER values—is ethical, adaptable, gritty, empathetic, and remarkable.
Is inspired by our MOVE principles, which are the blueprint for how things get done at Grammarly: move fast and learn faster, obsess about creating customer value, value impact over activity, and embrace healthy disagreement rooted in trust.
Is able to collaborate in person 3 weeks per quarter, traveling if necessary to the hub where the team is based.
Has a proven track record of crafting marketing strategies and plans that drive MQLs that convert to generate pipelines for new business and expansion.
Is an expert in the B2B lead funnel, from lead > MQL > SQL> opportunity to close, with an understanding of what drives conversion/volume of each.
Move themselves and others to action, even if there is incomplete information or other hurdles.
Has an ownership mindset toward results, failures, and successes.
Can successfully coordinate, empower, and direct multiple stakeholders, details, and timelines toward a specific goal.
Can consider, play out, and weigh alternative scenarios based on strategic objectives. 
Can analyze and pull meaningful insights from both quantitative and qualitative data.


























































Proven experience in marketing within a B2B SaaS company; with expertise leading a global demand gen organization at scale (EMEA, APAC)
Demonstrated success owning the strategy, framework, development and execution for global, multichannel demand generation campaigns, targeting enterprise size companies. 
Big picture thinking, and meticulous attention to details – ability to quickly understand overall business objectives, create a well-aligned marketing strategy and execution plans with clearly defined metrics and KPIs
Strong analytical skills, and proven track record in making data-driven decisions to continually optimize performance and determine future investments
A bachelor’s degree or equivalent related working experience is required
This position is not eligible for visa sponsorship
 2+ years of professional non-internship marketing experience
 Experience using data and metrics to drive improvements
 Experience with Excel or Tableau (data manipulation, macros, charts and pivot tables)
 Experience managing or working within cross-functional marketing and creative teams
 BA or equivalent
 Experience with compiling and presenting data to cross-functional stakeholders and leadership teams.
 Strong understanding of web analytics concepts, including metric definitions, measurement methods, and standard reporting practices.
 Proficient with web analytics tools like Adobe Analytics or Google Analytics.
 Working knowledge of A/B testing concepts, best practices, and tools.
 Familiar with digital marketing analytics concepts such as multi-touch attribution, and conversion rate optimization.
 Familiar with website targeting and personalization methods.
 Advanced degree in analytics, data science, or a similar field.
 3-5 years experience.
 Previous experience with managing web analytics implementations for complex and/or large organizations.
 Deep technical understanding of website tagging for analytics.
 High level of proficiency with A/B testing concepts and best practices, including hands-on experience with setting up and executing web experiments.
 Experience working in B2B marketing, subscriptions, consumer products, and/or e-commerce.
 Experience using SQL to extract, join, and manipulate large datasets.
Bachelor's degree in Marketing, Business, or related field. 
12+ years of experience in a growth marketing role
5+ years of people management experience
Experience leading and developing marketing strategies for emerging technologies
Proven track record of driving customer or B2B partner acquisition and revenue growth through effective marketing strategies 
Data first approach
Strong proficiency in marketing analytics tools (e.g., Google Analytics, HubSpot, etc.)
Ability to think, plan and execute on multiple projects simultaneously in an organized fashion
Strong analytical skills and a high comfort level with analytics platforms are necessary. Must be able to build, interpret, and communicate key results to stakeholders. 
Deep expertise in Google Ads. 
Strong understanding of SEO, keyword strategy, and interplay between paid and organic. Must be able to build a plan without an SEO agency. 
Must manage a budget effectively, including allocating spend and optimizing based on performance. 
Must be able to self-direct in a high-growth, rapidly changing environment. 
5+ years of B2D or B2B experience in growth marketing, growth product, and/or lifecycle marketing, ideally in SaaS/Self-Serve. Product-led growth and 2+ years of experience in marketing to a technical audience desired
Drive to provide the best possible experience to our users
Deep understanding of software development processes and methodologies
Understanding of how to drive customer engagement and product usage through value-based marketing
Understanding of and appreciation for the big picture (market, customers, company) but also the details to successfully scale programs
Passion to objectively measure your efforts and only make decisions based on data
A positive, collaborative mindset - you love working with others and incorporating relevant feedback
An owner mentality - you take complete ownership of your work and champion efforts to get things to completion
Flexibility and adaptability - you enjoy working in ambiguity. You are calm and effective under pressure and able to pivot quickly. You excel at task prioritization and proper evaluation of situational urgency
Focus and drive - you know what matters and apply yourself with gusto, continuously exploring how much faster you can learn and execute
Bachelor’s degree or equivalent experience 
Minimum of 3+ years working in the B2B SaaS vertical
Minimum of 4+ years working in SEM channels with strong success record
Prior ownership of marketing pipe or revenue targets is a requirement
Strong, hands-on-keys expertise with Google Ads, Google Ads Editor, Microsoft Ads and Search Ads 360
Self-starter who can catch a leadership vision and bring it to life on their own
Strong attention to detail
Knowledge and experience with web analytics tools (Google Analytics) and conversion tracking
Understanding of sophisticated bidding metrics – LTV, CAC, tCPA, tROAS, offline revenue uploads, custom weighted conversions
Familiarity with Google Tag Manager is a bonus
Strong analytical skills and the ability to interpret data to make informed decisions.
Strong Excel skills: pivot tables, VLOOKUP, SUMIFS
Knowledge of SEO and other digital marketing channels is advantageous.
Excellent communication skills and the ability to work collaboratively within a team.
Bachelor’s degree in marketing, business, or a related field.
5+ years of experience in paid media campaign management, specifically in the US, Canada, or Europe markets.
Proficiency in tools like Google Ads, Facebook Ads, GA4, and AppsFlyer (or other third-party attribution tools).
Strong analytical skills with an ability to derive actionable insights from data.
Excellent communication skills, both verbal and written.
Ability to work in a fast-paced, dynamic environment.
A particular understanding of the financial and investment fields can be a plus.
 You have advanced knowledge of Google Ads Platform (Search, Shop, Discovery, YouTube), Social Ads Platforms (Meta, TikTok, LinkedIn, etc.), CTV, Amazon Advertising, and DSPs and linear TV advertising. 
 You are an expert in media targeting and segmentation (consumer and HCP), multi-channel media plan development, and agency management. 
 You have strong analytical skills with an ability to uncover insights from performance/measurement tracking to drive action that increases performance and brand impact. 
 You have advanced knowledge of website event tagging and tracking, including the Facebook Pixel and Google Tag Manager. 
 You have strong communication, presentation skills, including strength in conducting group meetings. 
 You are highly motivated, results-oriented, self-starter who embraces a fast-paced environment. 
 You can work independently and thrive in a fast-paced, entrepreneurial culture, and are comfortable in an occasionally ambiguous environment. 
 You stay current on the latest marketing trends and best practices, identify new and emerging advertising opportunities, and influence innovation. 
 You have a positive attitude and the ability to work in a collaborative environment that values transparency. 
 8+ years of experience in digital marketing within an agency or retail organization 
4+ years of B2C mobile app performance marketing experience with a consistent track record driving quality growth
STEM or related degree
Strong understanding of the mobile app ecosystem and/or subscription landscape
Experience in running one or more of these channels: Google App Campaigns, Meta, TikTok, and Ad Networks
Data oriented, having a sound understanding of mobile user behavior and its analytics, can supervise and implement campaigns based on performance data
A strong sense for brand and details; a keen eye for creative that gets results
Excellent communication skills
Low ego and ability to work in a team environment
Deep expertise in digital / performance marketing across search, social, affiliate, and display channels (6+ years preferred). Hands-on experience managing paid search campaigns at scale is a must-have.
Experience at a fast growing company (experience in B2B preferred)
Strong analytical mindset. Experience analyzing campaign datasets, website metrics, and internal conversion data with a proven ability to translate data insights into action
Proficient with basic analytical tools (Google Sheets/Excel, Looker, Google Analytics)
A strong attention to detail and top-tier organizational and project management skills
Ability to drive projects forward across multiple teams and manage multiple campaigns at once in a fast-paced environment
A desire to constantly improve and zero patience for inefficiency
Self starter: go-getter attitude who likes to get things done on their own initiative




Marketing Analytics Qualifications Backlog
Strong experience in data visualization (minimum of 3+ years of experience), including designing and building visually stunning dashboards and reports
Minimum of 3+ years working with BI software (Looker or Tableau) and a strong understanding of it’s features and capabilities for creating engaging visualizations
Experience building custom visualizations and extensions in Looker using Javascript, React or D3. Or related experience building custom visualizations in other applications.
Excellent knowledge of data visualization best practices, design principles, and usability concepts
Ability to transform complex data sets into clear and concise visualizations that effectively convey insights
Proficiency in data storytelling, presenting data in a narrative format to drive understanding and decision-making
Experience working with executive-level stakeholders and delivering insights that support strategic decision-making
3+ years experience and strong knowledge of SQL and data manipulation
Excellent communication skills, with the ability to effectively communicate data-driven insights to non-technical audiences
Passion for creating visually appealing and impactful dashboards
Like to tinker and code (Python/R)
Have a solid portfolio of past work that demonstrates a strong visual eye
Are knowledgeable about statistics and data science
2+ years of leading analytics teams with direct reports
Proficiency in Looker and a deep understanding of its features and capabilities for creating engaging visualizations
Extensive experience working with Data Engineering
Experience updating and maintaining DBT pipelines
Experience working with Databricks
5+ years in strategy, analytics or finance role supporting multiple stakeholders
Strong SQL proficiency (joins, subqueries/CTEs, case statements, cast/convert, etc.)
Experience building and managing executive-level performance dashboards
Proven ability to summarize complex concepts for executive-level stakeholders
Ability to independently validate large data sets
Strong quantitative and qualitative abilities
Strong Excel proficiency (statistical functions, regressions, linest, etc.)
PowerPoint/Slides proficiency with linked data tables and a good eye for visual story telling
Proven ability to organize and interpret messy data to find insights
Exceptional written and oral communication skills
5+ years relevant work experience supporting a Marketing or similar function
Fluency in SQL
Proficiency in Python, R or similar scripting language
Experience in distributed data processing systems (Hive, Redshift, Presto, Snowflake, etc)
Firm knowledge around statistical methods and experiment design
Excellent judgment and problem solving skills
A self-starting mindset along with strong communication and collaboration skills, translating insights into business recommendations
8+ years of experience in general analytics, BI, business operations or other roles that have a significant data component (e.g. revenue operations, product management).
5+ years hiring and managing data analysts
Experience and confidence working with stakeholders across a wide variety of roles, including senior management.
Experience defining and managing data governance and access across a large organization is preferred.
Broad experience in data is preferred: product analytics, business operations, marketing and sales operations experience are all pluses.
Understanding of global data privacy regulations and experience matching data privacy requirements with business needs. This role is not solely responsible for data privacy, but will work closely with our Data Protection Officer and data privacy specialists.
Experience with financial services is a plus but not required, and specific finance training is not required. While finance will be a stakeholder for this role, this role is not responsible for Financial Planning and Analysis. 
BA or BS degree in a quantitative field such as economics, mathematics, statistics, or computer science/engineering
4+ years of proven work experience in a data analyst role for a technology company.
Excellent analytical skills and problem-solving ability; the ability to answer unstructured business questions and work independently to drive projects to conclusion.
Strong analytical skills with the capacity to collect, organize, analyze, and disseminate significant amounts of information with attention to detail and accuracy.
Experience extracting insights using advanced SQL to work efficiently at scale. Advanced expertise with commonly used analytics tools including Google Analytics, Looker and MS Excel.
Strong knowledge of statistics: this includes experimental design for optimization, statistical significance, confidence intervals and predictive analytics techniques.
Must be self-directed, organized and detail oriented as well as have the ability to multitask and work effectively in a fast-paced environment.
Active team player, excellent communication skills, positive attitude and good work ethic.
You come up with creative solutions to challenging problems.
Experience working alongside product and data engineering/data science teams.
Experience working in an e-commerce or recurring digital subscription business.
Experience working at a high-growth startup.
Passionate about our values and how we work together as a data pod and company
Must be very detail oriented and experienced with writing tests and devising cross checks. Our data models are production systems and this role, along with others, are responsible for ensuring that any changes made to them are thoroughly tested
4+ years of experience working with data and related technologies like data warehouses, visualization tools, databases, and ETL pipelines
Experience building data visualizations, dashboards, and presentations that quickly express actionable insights
A track record of developing data products with high business impact and experience determining priorities within projects to ensure efficient collaboration and on-time delivery
Experience working closely with non-technical end-users, as well as maintaining data catalogs and semantic layers intended for their use
BA degree or higher in Business, Computer Science, Engineering, Statistics, Economics, Analytics, Mathematics, or a related field
3+ years of experience working in data and analytics
A track record of creating data architecture and systems that are robust and enable business leaders to access, analyze, and build internal decision support tools
Demonstrated experience operating in a real-time data environment and technical supervision of projects and company-wide initiatives
Deep experience in the data management and analytical tool space, and a history of applying the correct mix of solutions to solve business problems
Can easily and clearly communicate with engineers to executives in the same hour
Proficiency in SQL/noSQL databases and supporting suites of tools
Strong verbal and written communication skills; a demonstrable track record of influencing up, down, and across organizations
6+ years Analytics or Business Intelligence experience supporting Sales or Marketing organizations; high growth SaaS experience highly preferred. (Strategy consulting a plus) 2+ years of people management experience.
Advanced knowledge of SQL, Excel, and industry leading CRM systems, and have built/managed dashboard suites in tools like Tableau or Looker.
Proven analytical and quantitative skills with a data-driven approach to problem-solving.
Excellent communication and presentation skills and proven ability to translate data into actionable insights.
Team player who understands the collaborative nature of this work with the ability to influence at C-suite level in a cross-functional environment.
Bachelor's degree in information systems, software engineering, computer science or similar field or equivalent experience in the field 
5+ years of experience with some or all the following; Data, analytical techniques, statistical modeling, marketing, and customer data related improvements and web analytics 
Ability to communicate complex information in an easy-to-understand format. 
Data Viz Skills in one or some of the following: 
PowerBI, Tableau, Qlik, Looker, Domo, other similar solution 
Data storage and management tools in one or some of the following: SQL Server, MySQL 
Data integration tools in one or some of the following: Apache Nifi, Talend, Informatica 
Cloud services in one or some of the following: AWS, Google Cloud Platform, Microsoft Azure 
Strong ability to lead, guide and train a team. 
5+ years of experience in analytical roles of progressive scope and complexity, with an emphasis on web/digital analytics. 
 Experience with web analytics platforms such as Google Analytics. 
 Experience with A/B testing (i.e. Google Optimize), and tag management systems (i.e. Tealium). 
2+ years of experience with SQL or BigQuery
 Experience building dashboards and data-driven presentations with actionable insights and recommendations for a variety of audiences and levels, including senior leadership. 
 Technical proficiency in JavaScript, CSS, jQuery, HTML5. 
 Familiarity with SQL/CRM databases, Python, R, SAS, or other analytics/statistical tools. 
 Experience with data visualization tools such as Tableau or Looker. 
A Bachelor or Masters’ Degree in a quantitative field (Operations Research, Computer Science, Engineering, Applied Math, Economics, Statistics, Analytics, Management/Business Information Systems, or related degree)
Minimum of 3 years of related work experience
Data management and visualization skills / tools in one or all of the following (SQL, Python, Power BI or similar).
Strong business acumen & communication skills, including the ability to deliver a clear story to influence agreement to your recommendations with data and insights.
Experience conducting quantitative and qualitative analysis with analytics techniques to solve defined business problems.
Self-motivated to work with diverse business scenarios, prioritizing multiple priorities and have a business and consultancy mind-set, while technically (data) savvy, and passionate about discovering new/better ways of doing things!
Experience with cloud platforms (Amazon Web Services, Azure, or Google Cloud) 
Proficiency in modern data architectures and relational database design and development 
Experience with cloud data platforms (Snowflake, Databricks, Redshift, Synapse, or BigQuery)
Proficiency with data visualization and analytics platforms (PowerBI, Tableau, Looker, Sigma, or Thoughtspot)
Experience with data science platforms (Dataiku, Data Robot, H2O.ai, Jupyter Notebooks, Sagemaker, AzureML, or Tensorflow)
Proficiency with programming languages (Python, Spark, Scala, or Go)
Experience leading teams of analytics engineers, data analysts, and data scientists on projects 
Proficiency with data management techniques (master data, data quality, data governance)
Experience with agile ceremonies, project execution, and solution delivery
Proficiency with product development lifecycles (CI/CD, DataOps, MLOps, QE)
Proven track record of selling and delivering $5M+ in professional services
Proven track record in managing team members including defining clear roles, responsibilities, and expectations
Proven track record handling difficult client and team member situations, leveraging clear and concise communications that respectfully resolve the conflict
Proven track record of setting team strategy and collaborating with peers to enable organizational success
Excellent board-room presentation skills and senior client stakeholder management skills across the end-to-end client relationship
Passionate about learning new technologies
Minimum of 8 years of experience in an analytical role, with a focus on web analytics, finance, or consulting.
Master's degree or MBA preferred, with a strong emphasis on statistics, analytics, and/or econometrics.
Proficient in Excel and SQL, demonstrating expert-level capabilities.
Exceptional analytical skills, including problem-solving, attention to detail, and clear communication of complex results.
Demonstrated ability to work with large datasets and effectively utilize relevant processes and technologies.
Proven experience in people management, with strong interpersonal and communication skills, enabling successful team management and influencing across all levels and functions.
Ability to deliver insights with creativity and pragmatism, ensuring a clear understanding of the "so what?" implications.
Independent thinker with the confidence to challenge conventional approaches.
Proactive mindset with a hands-on and can-do attitude.
8+ years of experience working in an analytics or business intelligence function for a SaaS or eCommerce company using SQL to analyze large datasets to answer business questions (ideally in both acquisition and retention capacities)
4+ years of management of technical analysts required
Proven success administering data visualization tools and techniques (Tableau, Looker, or Sisense required) in an environment where infrastructure is largely not pre-established
Multiple years of experience using SQL to analyze large datasets and answer business questions, requiring the active ability to jump in and demonstrate to team
Ability to draw upon experience transforming ambiguous problems into innovative analytics solutions via process, technology, and/or insights changes
Deep knowledge of go-to-market tactics in a B2B context, and the ability to ask contextually relevant questions to quickly ramp education on disparate business processes and goals
Technically proficient in CRM systems (Salesforce required), marketing automation software (Marketo preferred), customer data platforms (Twilio Segment ideal) and data visualization tools (Tableau required, Amplitude a plus)
Familiarity with industry trends in AI/ML, previous data science experience is a plus
An engaged, people person with experience in cross-functional roles and indirect influencing
Proactive and results-oriented, comfortable independently solving ambiguous problems
Thoughtful, servant leader who earns trust and builds strong working relationships
Bachelor’s degree in Finance, Economics, Statistics, Math, or Engineering required
Master’s degree in Business, Computer Science, Management Information Systems, or Data Science preferred
Strong 12+ years of experience in sales or marketing operations at a leadership level
Proactive and passionate operations leader who understands marketing’s role within the GTM strategy
Business analytics experience with past track record for leading projects such as -financial planning, funnel analysis, lead scoring models, marketing measurement models etc -Ability to trace complex SQL queries and understand data warehouse solutions strongly preferred
Ability to develop strong partnerships with sales and marketing operations and drive a point of view on strategic priorities based on internal and external data
Strong communicatorwith ability to articulate, present and debate recommendations with all levels of management in sales and marketing
Bachelor’s degree required, Masters degree preferred or equivalent military experience required
Bachelor's degree in Marketing, Business, Statistics, Data Science, or a related field; a Master's degree is a plus
Minimum of 7 years of proven experience in marketing analytics, data analysis, or a related role, with a strong track record of deriving actionable insights from data using SQL, preferably within the pet industry
Exceptional SQL skills with the ability to write complex queries and manipulate data for analysis 
Proficiency in data analytics tools such as Python, R, or data visualization tools
Strong understanding of digital marketing channels, including SEO, SEM, social media, and email marketing, with a focus on the pet products market 
Experience in data architecture, database design, and data modeling is required
Excellent leadership skills and the ability to mentor team members
Excellent communication and presentation skills with the ability to convey complex data insights in a clear and actionable manner
Strategic thinking, problem-solving ability, and a results-oriented mindset
3–5 years of experience in Analytics Engineering, Data Engineering, or Data Analytics. 
Proficiency in SQL, Python, and dbt. 
Effective communication skills and the ability to translate business needs into tractable work items. 
Best practices in building marketing data pipelines and integrating internal data into third-party tools for campaign optimization. 
Experience with SaaS businesses and subscription data. 
Curiosity, savviness to navigate in a dynamic environment, and a growth mindset. 
5+ years experience as a Marketing data scientist, data analyst, or data engineer
Deep understanding of digital and performance marketing
The ability to translate raw data into meaningful business insights and to tell a story with that data
Posses a natural curiosity and strive to uncover the deeper relationships and opportunities that are not always immediately discoverable
Excellent communication skills with a track record of collaborating with senior Marketing leadership
Experience writing and optimizing complex SQL queries and are familiar with a data-specific programming language (Julia, Python, R, etc.)
Expert proficiency in SQL and/or Python.
Expert in database table design - able to create database structures from scratch that ingests multiple data sources and enable a variety of aggregate views.
Expert in writing API calls to pull in data - big bonus for experience doing this with social, website, and/or marketing platforms (AdTheorent, Meta, Google Ads, GA4, TradeDesk, etc).
Experience and strong knowledge in data warehousing concepts and analytics platforms.
2+ years of experience with Tableau, Lookr, PowerBI or equivalent as a visualization and reporting tool.
4+ years experience in creating and supporting databases and ETL processes.
Some experience working with cloud platforms such as AWS, Azure and GCP.
BS/MS/PhD in Computer Science, Information Systems, Applied Mathematics or a related field.
relational DBs (PostgresSQL, SQL Server), NoSQL DBs (MongoDB, Cassandra, Redis), data warehouses (BigQuery, Redshift, Snowflake), data lakes (S3, Hadoop), and time-series DBs (InfluxDB) based on strategic needs
Proven competence with development methodologies, business process management, QA fundamentals, process documentation and project management
Advanced knowledge of data visualization tools and techniques such as Tableau, Looker, Power BI, etc.
Solid understanding of statistics and analytical techniques
Strong awareness of the media measurement landscape and topical issues (implications of GDPR, ATT, etc.)
Experience with tools such as DSPs, ad servers, and panel-based TV measurement tools 
Experience working in an Agile environment using Jira or similar tools
Advanced experience with SQL and data visualization or business intelligence tools (Looker, Tableau, etc.)
 3+ years experience working with web analytics platforms such as Google Analytics, GA360, Adobe Analytics
3+ years proficiency in deploying various first party and third party tags through tag management systems such as Adobe Launch, Google Tag Manager
Proficiency of technical skills including but not limited to JavaScript, jQuery, SQL, HTML/CSS 
Expert-level knowledge in the process of how data is passed between a website and data layers, as well as, experience engaging with data objects and arrays within the data layer
Expert-level understanding of digital media platforms (social, e-mail) and metrics of digital success within marketing analytics (e.g. campaign attribution/effectiveness, web tracking, customer lifecycle marketing) 
Experience and a strong understanding of measurement protocol and post-message API 
Experience working with database systems such as Redshift 
3+ years experience in using data visualization tools, such as Tableau, Google Data Studio, for creating dashboards, reports, and data exploration 
Skilled in data wrangling & modeling (Python preferred), database querying (SQL), and use of cloud-based platforms (e.g., Snowflake, Sagemaker).
Knowledge of best-practice modeling techniques for one or more of the following will be helpful: price elasticity, consumer demand modeling, experimental design, time series analysis, or forecasting.
Ability to rapidly synthesize data and model results into insights & recommendations (i.e., taking the “What” and defining the “So What” and “Now What”).
8+ years of professional non-internship marketing experience
Experience using data and metrics to drive improvements
Experience using data and metrics to measure impact and determine improvements
Experience in audience segmentation and targeting
Experience presenting metrics and progress to goal to senior leadership
Experience using Microsoft Excel to manipulate and analyze data
Ability to independently break down large datasets and synthesize inputs from multiple sources
Ability to think strategically about complex and unstructured business problems, leading to recommendations and action plans
Ability to craft a compelling story and concisely present recommendations across teams and levels including both technical and non-technical audiences
Ability to manage, influence, negotiate, and inspire others in a fast-moving environment
Ability to use data visualization tools to provide actionable insights and reusable frameworks
Strong written and verbal communication skills for internal stakeholders, including senior leadership
Strong product and user experience sense
Excellent organization, planning skills, and attention to detail
Advanced analytical and problem solving skills
Proficiency in SQL
Bachelor's or Master's degree in Data Science, Computer Science, Statistics, Business Analytics, etc., or commensurate relevant experience
6-8+ years of experience in data analysis and insights, with a focus on product growth and user engagement in a SaaS product
Strong proficiency in SQL, data querying, and data visualization tools (e.g., Tableau, Power BI)
Familiarity with A/B testing methodologies and experiment design
Excellent analytical skills and a strong business acumen to connect business insights with product strategy
Strong project management skills, and the ability to work cross-functionally to produce results
Excellent communication and presentation skills, with the ability to convey complex technical concepts to non-technical stakeholders
A plus if you have an understanding of user experience (UX) principles and user-centric design practices
Minimum of 5 years in digital analytics experience.
Advanced knowledge of Adobe Analytics products.
Technical understanding of how digital analytics and tag management solutions are deployed and the differences between providers (ex: Adobe, Google, Tealium, Ensighten, etc.)
Knowledge of Customer Data Platforms
Deep understanding of segmentation and targeting.
Experience in actionable analytics and optimization.
Experience developing reporting and advancing data visualization capabilities with new or existing tools (e.g., Tableau, Looker, PowerBI, DataStudio, Qlik, TIBCO/Spotfire, etc.)
Ability to derive and present insights from data.
Ability to lead and develop a small team.
Experience presenting and communicating with senior leaders and executives.
Experience in strategic marketing and planning.
Ability to manage time effectively within a very complex environment.
Proficient with statistical practices and capabilities
Deep knowledge of big data practices such as Amazon Web Services, Google Big Query and similar applications
Partner with Global Business Product and Marketing organization to understand customer needs and our advertising product/solution use cases, drive marketing strategy development, inform creative expression, and optimize/improve marketing communications to achieve business objectives
Develop the holistic learning agenda (in collaboration with other Understanding functions such as UXR, Product Data Science and Marketing Decision Science) for our B2B marketing priorities
Design and execute best-in-class quantitative and qualitative research to support decision-making, strategic planning and shape marketing/brand strategies, campaign development, and product/solutions development
Translate research findings into actionable insights with clear recommendations/implications and produce highly effective communication that motivates people to apply learnings in marketing and across the organization including marketing leadership
Develop researchers to build a high performing team
5 or more years of experience with marketing strategy, B2B marketing, brand, and/or growth marketing
5 or more years of experience with people management
10 or more years of experience with primary research (quantitative and qualitative)
Proven expertise in leading insights-driven marketing strategy development and activation support from definition to execution, driving impact and influencing product and marketing decision-making
Effective engagement both at the technical/product level as well as on marketing/communications
Experience in engaging in research work at a tactical/executional level as well as managing the growth and development of a team
Problem-solving skills and experience moving quickly from blank state to well-defined problem with a suitable methodology
Communication and presentation skills with proven track record of using insights to influence executives and colleagues
Experience quickly scaling and prioritizing in a dynamic and fast-paced environment, drive change, and collaborate effectively with a variety of partner
Experience in building a high performance team who delivers high impact with efficiency
In-depth understanding of digital ads ecosystem and advertising and marketing decision making process
4-5 years relevant work experience within the area of analytics or business intelligence experience; minimum one year in management position
Advanced knowledge of Google Analytics or Adobe Analytics
Hands on with data visualization platforms (Tableau, Looker)
Strong commands in SQL (Google BigQuery is strongly preferred)
Experience in website page tagging and report development with web analytics and customer insight tools
A clear and concise communicator that can effectively manage expectations
A thoughtful, innovative, proactive thinker with excellent problem-solving skills
Solid written and verbal communication skill with ability to communicate/translate complex concepts to non-technical audience
Strong management capabilities, great people person, ability to lead and grow teams
6+ years of work experience in data analytics/science or other relevant fields
Experience with data querying languages (e.g. SQL) scripting languages (e.g. Python), and/or statistical/mathematical software (e.g. R)
Experience with tools such as Amplitude, Tableau, Salesforce, etc.
Experience in building predictive models 
Comfortable in transforming raw data to build new data sets 
Familiarity with optimizing product funnels, running experiments, building dashboards that share meaningful results and outcomes.
Have a bias for using the right tools to get the job done with efficiency. You have experience making tradeoffs between speed and accuracy.
Have worked in a fast-growing start-up
Have experience at a PLG environment (a plus if you’ve build virality models)
Strong communicator, verbally and written, with the ability to break down complex topics into simple solutions and ideas
8+ years of prior experience in Marketing Analytics or B2B sales analytics.
Experience in Business Intelligence, statistics, data science, and data management.
Exposure to the end-to-end Customer and Marketing lifecycle: Customer acquisition, Lead Management & Demand Generation, Brand & Digital Marketing, Loyalty Marketing
Experience with product development and managing agile scrum teams
Deep knowledge with customer/contact relationship management (e.g., Dynamics), marketing automation tools and platforms (e.g., Adobe). 
Experience in managing instrumentation and telemetry data from modern cloud platforms.
3+ years of experience working with and building in BI tools like Power BI and Tableau.
2+ years of experience in leading a project team and ability to work with highly cross functional teams to achieve common goals.
Experience architecting integrations between different data platforms (e.g., Snowflake, Dynamics, Adobe) and applications to deliver on specified use cases.
Thought leadership and influencing skills to share what are the possibilities of Marketing Analytics and cultivate interest amongst stakeholders.
Exceptional verbal and written communication skills and ability to engage effectively at all levels of the organization.
Analyze customer journeys and provide insights leveraging Adobe Analytics and ContentSquare 
Evaluate potential business impact of digital test opportunities
Establish test KPIs and calculate required test duration
Monitor test dashboards to ensure accurate test execution
Interpret digital test results and ensure adherence to statistical best practices
Quantify business impact upon completion of test
Partner with Marketing leadership to develop an analytics roadmap and help build a rigorous culture of data-driven decision making
Drive insights, identify opportunities, and understand behavior and long-term trends that meaningfully impact OpenStore’s business
Work with engineering to build and evolve our data infrastructure to surface key metrics through automated dashboards and reports
Collaborate with performance marketing to design and execute experiments, incrementality testing, media mix modeling, & spend ROI curves
Lead the development of models and predictive KPIs to improve the targeting and creative engines across marketing channels
Provide actionable reporting, analysis, and core metric dashboarding that helps marketing teams improve performance across channels 
Champion data literacy within the organization, build actionable data products, and drive adoption rates 
Analyze channel data, including email marketing, upsell, retention, ads, customer segments to pinpoint opportunities to increase revenue and margin 
Provide analysis and insight on marketing initiatives: campaign performance, channel contributions, attribution analysis, ROI, and performance against budget and forecast 
Partner with Business Intelligence and Business teams to build automated dashboards to help business partners and leadership make faster decisions 
Partner with Business Intelligence (BI) teams to scope and deliver dashboards using Tableau that enable data driven decision making 
Engage cross functionally with Sales and RevOps Excellence to build full funnel views of the prospect journey and strive for one single source of truth 
Bachelor’s degree in Marketing or a quantitative disciplines (e.g., Statistics, Computer Science, Operations Research, Business Analytics, Engineering). Masters degrees in related fields are preferred but not required. 
6+ years of experience leveraging analytics best practices to improve marketing initiatives 
Solid understanding of website best practices, ecommerce and digital marketing principles, measurements, and consumer behavior; Experience in developing data-driven strategies to drive customer-marketing activities 
Experience in creating dashboards in BI tools such as Power BI (preferred), Tableau, or Looker required
Proficiency in SQL preferred
Experience in statistical modeling and programming language such as Python/R preferred
Superior quantitative and analytical skills, intellectual curiosity and a passion for achieving practical business impact. 
Strong project management expertise and experience 
Strong problem-solving and decision-making abilities with excellent attention to detail 
Strong interpersonal skills including confidence in dealing with people at all levels of the organization, ability to manage intake, and present insights. 
High-energy and a desire to work in a result-oriented, fast-growth, fast-paced environment.
8+ years of prior experience in Marketing Analytics or B2B sales analytics.
Experience in Business Intelligence, statistics, data science, and data management.
Exposure to the end-to-end Customer and Marketing lifecycle: Customer acquisition, Lead Management & Demand Generation, Brand & Digital Marketing, Loyalty Marketing
Experience with product development and managing agile scrum teams
Deep knowledge with customer/contact relationship management (e.g., Dynamics), marketing automation tools and platforms (e.g., Adobe). 
Experience in managing instrumentation and telemetry data from modern cloud platforms.
3+ years of experience working with and building in BI tools like Power BI and Tableau.
2+ years of experience in leading a project team and ability to work with highly cross functional teams to achieve common goals.
Experience architecting integrations between different data platforms (e.g., Snowflake, Dynamics, Adobe) and applications to deliver on specified use cases.
Thought leadership and influencing skills to share what are the possibilities of Marketing Analytics and cultivate interest amongst stakeholders.
Exceptional verbal and written communication skills and ability to engage effectively at all levels of the organization.
Minimum of six years professional work experience in marketing analytics field, with a primary emphasis on digital analytics
Expertise in working with a variety of platforms, including website analytics, social media analytics, email analytics and audience analytics
Lead and direct the marketing analytics function, overseeing the entire data analysis process from data collection to reporting, and ensuring the delivery of comprehensive insights on marketing performance, customer behavior, and campaign effectiveness. 
 Collaborate closely with the executive team to align marketing strategies with broader business objectives, providing data-driven recommendations to enhance revenue growth, customer acquisition, and retention. 
 Develop and implement a robust analytics framework and data strategy, establishing key metrics, attribution models, and performance benchmarks to measure marketing effectiveness and optimize ROI. 
 Manage and mentor a team of marketing data analysts, guiding their professional growth, fostering a culture of continuous learning, and promoting collaboration and knowledge sharing. 
 Partner with cross-functional teams, including Finance, Merchandising, and Performance Marketing, to align on goals, leverage data insights, and drive cohesive strategies that maximize business outcomes. 
 Oversee the design and implementation of data pipelines and ETL processes, ensuring the seamless flow of data between various platforms and systems, and maintaining data integrity and accuracy. 
 Drive the development and implementation of advanced analytics and visualization solutions, leveraging tools such as Looker, Google Analytics, Big Query, and other relevant technologies. 
 Lead the exploration and adoption of new analytical methodologies, data sources, and emerging technologies to enhance marketing analytics capabilities and stay ahead of industry trends. 
 Ensure compliance with data privacy regulations, establish data governance practices, and champion data security and confidentiality throughout the organization 
Strong 12+ years of experience in sales or marketing operations at a leadership level
Proactive and passionate operations leader who understands marketing’s role within the GTM strategy
Business analytics experience with past track record for leading projects such as -financial planning, funnel analysis, lead scoring models, marketing measurement models etc -Ability to trace complex SQL queries and understand data warehouse solutions strongly preferred
Ability to develop strong partnerships with sales and marketing operations and drive a point of view on strategic priorities based on internal and external data
Strong communicatorwith ability to articulate, present and debate recommendations with all levels of management in sales and marketing
5+ years experience as a Marketing data scientist, data analyst, or data engineer
Deep understanding of digital and performance marketing
The ability to translate raw data into meaningful business insights and to tell a story with that data
Posses a natural curiosity and strive to uncover the deeper relationships and opportunities that are not always immediately discoverable
Excellent communication skills with a track record of collaborating with senior Marketing leadership
Experience writing and optimizing complex SQL queries and are familiar with a data-specific programming language (Julia, Python, R, etc.)
 5- 7 years experience 
 Proficient in Google Analytics and third-party tag implementation, demonstrating the ability to effectively deploy tracking codes 
 Specialized in leveraging Google Analytics’ event tracking capabilities, custom dimensions, and cross-platform tracking for both websites and apps 
 Responsible for understanding the business requirements and implementation specifications to capture user behavior, conversions, and insights using events-based tracking 
 Develop and manage event tracking configurations within Google Analytics enabling detailed tracking of user interactions 
 Collaborate seamlessly with engineering partners, data analysts, and marketing partners to align tracking efforts 
 Create and maintain comprehensive tracking solution documentation for both websites and mobile applications 
 Perform data quality audits, QA tags and proactively identify data collection issues 
 Experience with implementing and maintaining Adobe Analytics and/or Google Analytics 
 Experience with implementing tags via tag management tools (i.e. Google Tag Manager) 
 Experience with GDPR and data privacy regulations, ensuring compliant data collection 
 Experience working with insights and reporting tools, such as PowerBI 
 Direct Marketing and Customer Relationship Management (CRM) analytics background and familiarity working with customer, prospect, and 3rd party data
 In-depth experience performing descriptive and multi-variate statistical analytics (e.g. linear regression, CHAID, etc.) and apply to business needs (e.g. response / targeting forecast models, etc.)
 In-depth experience creating and managing analytical data sets in potentially sub-optimal data infrastructures and the in-depth experience leveraging statistical software packages (e.g. SAS, JMP, etc.) and other user tools to do so
 Ability to leverage mainstreamed business intelligence tools (e.g. OBIEE) and environments (e.g. data warehouse with SQL) as needed
 Ability to direct and partner with IT to continuously improve data management and analytics infrastructures
 Ability to clearly and concisely simplify and communicate complex concepts, findings, and implications to all levels of the organization (e.g. junior marketing managers, agency and distribution partners, C-level, etc.)
 Experience leading, coaching, and developing junior team members and advancing their analytic skills.
Expert-level skills in foundational analytics platforms required. Skills in advanced analytics, statistics and/or data warehouse tools are required. Aptitude in Microsoft Office suite, with strength and effective communication of information skills in Excel and PowerPoint. Understanding of data warehouse solutions, databases, and analytic/statistics packages a plus (Power BI, Oracle Answers, Minitab, R, Python, Java etc.).
Embodies the Culture, Builds Talented Teams, Harnesses Emotional Intelligence, Collaborates Cross-Functionally, Empowers and Inspires Accountability, & Accelerates Results.
The work environment characteristics described here are representative of those an employee encounters while performing the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.
 Analytic experience (5-10 years)
 Leadership experience (3+ years)
 Coaching and Mentoring (3+ years)
 Communication (Verbal, Written and Presented – Concepts and Data)
 Strong intellectual agility and reasoning skills
 Preferred Technical Skillsets: PowerBI, OBIEE, Informatica, SQL, Python, R, Java etc. Knowledge in Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence will be a plus.
Coach and mentor analytics teams to surface insights to drive executive decision making across the business
Improve and maintain high-visibility recurring executive reporting
Expand the GTM Analytics org based on stakeholder need 
Make the team more efficient: Research and implement new tooling/processes team-wide; seek out and automate existing costly manual processes
Serve as an analytical and technical thought partner to stakeholders on the analytics and data science teams and around the business
Translate insights to drive executive decision making across the business, and help align targets to cross-functional concepts 
Develop and own a roadmap helping GTM teams hit their targets and optimize their performance 
Make the team more efficient: Research and implement new tooling/processes; seek out and automate existing costly manual processes
Ability to independently break down large datasets and synthesize inputs from multiple sources
Ability to think strategically about complex and unstructured business problems, leading to recommendations and action plans
Ability to craft a compelling story and concisely present recommendations across teams and levels including both technical and non-technical audiences
Ability to manage, influence, negotiate, and inspire others in a fast-moving environment
Ability to use data visualization tools to provide actionable insights and reusable frameworks
Strong written and verbal communication skills for internal stakeholders, including senior leadership
Strong product and user experience sense
Excellent organization, planning skills, and attention to detail
Advanced analytical and problem solving skills
Proficiency in SQL
5+ years experience in management consulting, strategic data science/analytics roles in a technology company, or an equivalent analytical role in a high growth startup
Experience in leading high visibility projects and influencing others in a cross-functional team environment
Experience in communicating with and presenting to senior leaders and data storytelling
Strong ability in building decision making frameworks and data analysis, able to understand business issues, analyze large amounts of data, and draw actionable conclusions
Entrepreneurial self-starter - you naturally take ownership, look for opportunities, and do whatever it takes to drive results
Bachelor's or Master's degree in Data Science, Computer Science, Statistics, Business Analytics, etc., or commensurate relevant experience
6-8+ years of experience in data analysis and insights, with a focus on product growth and user engagement in a SaaS product
Strong proficiency in SQL, data querying, and data visualization tools (e.g., Tableau, Power BI)
Familiarity with A/B testing methodologies and experiment design
Excellent analytical skills and a strong business acumen to connect business insights with product strategy
Strong project management skills, and the ability to work cross-functionally to produce results
Excellent communication and presentation skills, with the ability to convey complex technical concepts to non-technical stakeholders
A plus if you have an understanding of user experience (UX) principles and user-centric design practices
Ability to quickly establish and build close working relationships with team members of varying backgrounds and positions within an organization.
Experience in implementing of cross-functional business efforts. Effective in influencing high-quality decisions, solving and/or escalating issues and meeting deadlines. Ability to balance multiple priorities.
Strong presentation skills - including building effective google slide presentations for executive audiences.
Strong critical thinking skills. Ability to analyze poorly defined areas and processes within a cross-functional team, work with leadership to align around recommendations and then implement new and improved processes.
Excellent written and verbal communication skills, including good judgment about, when, how, what, and to whom to communicate. Inform, educate, and inspire employees.
Comfort with ambiguity and motivated to solve complex problems.
Solution-oriented, collaborative & curious mindset
Experience defining, handling, and executing projects from start to finish. Including project management, data gathering and modeling, problem-solving, and communicating recommendations
5+ years of experience in an analytical role (consulting, finance, growth, analytics, etc).
High proficiency in SQL.
Experience with a modern programming language a plus.
Experience with data visualization tools like Looker, Mixpanel, Tableau, etc.
Developer experience in Looker is preferred (LookML).
Experience designing experiments.
Ability to gather insights from data and communicate findings clearly to a cross-functional team.
Team-oriented mindset and the ability to work with a wide range of individuals.
Naturally curious and willing to take measured risks.
Self-starter and able to work autonomously.
8+ years of Digital B2B Marketing Analytics and/or performance measurement and story-telling reporting experience.
Awareness and understanding of current and future industry trends, technology and best practices related to Buyer Journey Engagement and Lifecycle Marketing Performance
Experience in high growth, fast paced, heavily matrixed organizations
4 years of experience as a marketing analyst using statistical techniques and quantitative modeling
Experience developing data visualizations
3 years of experience analyzing data sets using SQL
Business acumen, strategic thinking, business process development, analytical and problem-solving skills
Strong relationship building skills and priority setting across teams
Be a thought leader with massive influence skills
Proven interpersonal and relationship management skills, with ability to obtain consensus among multiple stakeholders
Strong collaborative teamwork orientation with an ability to work effectively in a constantly changing environment, requiring ongoing re-evaluation of priorities
Detail oriented with ability to translate quantitative data analytics into actionable recommendations
Ability to communicate and present story-telling insights in ways that Marketing team members as well as Marketing and Executive Leadership and other functions will understand and take decision
Curious Analytical thinker, you find and solve problems to increase performance
B-to-B digital marketing ecosystem and how its success can be measured and insights derives for data driven decision making
Measurement, reporting and analytical techniques and their application to marketing challenges
Strong understanding of UI/UX
Marketing analytics technology
Revenue Marketing metrics
Experience with Google Analytics
SEO
SEM
Multi-touch attribution
SFDC and marketing automation platforms
Attribution tools
Excel/SQL/Data visualization 

SEO Qualifications Backlog
Proven Experience: Minimum of 5 years of hands-on experience in SEO, with a track record of driving substantial organic traffic growth and improving search engine rankings for competitive keywords.
Technical Proficiency: Proficiency in using SEO tools and platforms, such as Google Analytics, Google Search Console, Botify, SEMrush, or similar, to perform keyword research, analyze website performance, and identify optimization opportunities.
Analytical Mindset: Strong analytical skills with the ability to interpret data, draw insights, and make data-driven decisions to continually optimize and refine SEO strategies.
Industry Knowledge: In-depth understanding of search engine algorithms, ranking factors, and the latest trends and best practices in SEO to stay ahead of the curve and ensure compliance with search engine guidelines.
Cross-functional Collaboration: Demonstrated ability to collaborate effectively with cross-functional teams, including content, development, and design, to implement SEO strategies and achieve collective business goals.
Project Management: Exceptional project management skills to oversee multiple SEO initiatives simultaneously, set clear objectives, and deliver results within defined timelines.
Adaptability: A proactive and adaptable approach to problem-solving, continuously adjusting strategies to adapt to evolving search engine algorithms and industry changes.
Strong Communication: Excellent verbal and written communication skills, with the ability to present complex SEO concepts in a clear and concise manner to stakeholders at all levels.
Problem Solving: Experience with and ability to solve complex problems without being given the solution. Track record of stepping back to understand problems ensuring all time spent developing features or functionality is aligned with a validated business or customer problem.
Planning: Effectively plan 2-week sprints, quarterly goals, and long term (1-3 years) strategies for the program that are fully aligned with the business owner(s). Ability to document a vision for an area that communicates to business how work being done in the short, mid, and long term all align to a well thought out strategy aimed at transforming the success of your area.
Experience hiring and leading diverse teams
This role requires an individual with strong technical background, excellent communication skills and ability to translate business/marketing needs to technical requirements
5+ years of progressive experience in SEO, Search Marketing, Web Development, Content Marketing, or related field
Extensive knowledge of on-page SEO, technical SEO and search engine ranking factors
Experience with relevant SEO tools (ex: Botify, Screaming Frog, GSC, Brightedge, SEM Rush, etc.) and web analytics tools (ex: Google Analytics, Adobe, etc.)
Ability to read, write, and troubleshoot basic JS, HTML, and CSS
Expertise in A/B and other testing methods and experience measuring SEO tactics via these methods
High level of initiative and proven ability to work independently on multiple projects in a fast-paced environment
Cross-functional leadership skills with the ability to rally teams from across large organizations around clear objectives and key results
Personal commitment to putting the customer first, prioritizing user experience above search engines and adhering to Google Webmaster Guidelines
Clear communicator, with the ability to translate technical details to non-technical stakeholders
Proven experience as an SEO professional with 8+ years in progressively responsible roles, preferably in either a high volume Product Led Growth software company or a consumer e-commerce company.
Strong leadership and team management skills, with the ability to mentor and develop team members.
Expertise in SEO tools such as Google Analytics, Google Search Console, SEMrush, and others.
Expertise in Content Management platforms such as WordPress backend with a proven track record of optimizing high-performing websites that deliver business growth.
In-depth knowledge of on-page and technical SEO best practices, algorithm updates, and industry trends.
Proficiency in data analysis and using data-driven insights to optimize strategies.
Excellent communication and collaboration skills, with the ability to work effectively with cross-functional teams.
Proven track record of driving organic search growth and improving key performance metrics.
Define a multi-year SEO roadmap maximizing web, SEO, content, and lead-gen partnerships to drive growth 
Lead SEO initiatives that drive customer acquisition, improve website visibility, and achieve performance goals
Partner with Analytics to establish a clear measurement framework, define critical metrics, track and analyze performance, and demonstrate business impact.
Collaborate with web and editorial content to inform content development and roadmaps to improve organic performance
Cultivate a culture of testing and experimentation to drive innovation, apply findings, and uncover optimization opportunities that increase acquisition and deliver best-in-class member experiences.
Establish systems of governance and standards, define technical requirements and resources needed to complete short and long term plans.
You will own the creation and prioritization of the international SEO roadmap, as well as seeking alignment with internal and external team members.
You’ll manage and guide a team of local SEO and outreach specialists across our key priority markets.
You will work closely with PMs, localization specialists, engineers and data analysts to drive international SEO projects from planning, execution through to analysis and reporting.
You’ll set clear international SEO goals, critical metrics and requirements to define and measure what success looks like.
You’ll educate and evangelize international SEO so everyone is across international SEO standard processes across the business.
You will stay abreast of industry trends, best practices, and algorithms changes to advise SEO strategies and tactics, and identify new growth opportunities.
You’ll scale and grow the local SEO teams in different countries as needed. 
You’ll also scale and improve existing workflows and processes, with a focus on automation and efficiency.
You will provide advanced technical knowledge to solve complex problems.
You’ll lead a team that includes internal full time team members, external contractor coachees and contractor coaches.
You will share knowledge of localization methodology and processes and of global and regional requirements in order to influence large product delivery roadmaps.
Conduct partner, customer, and market research to identify new opportunities and support GTM strategy
Develop marketing content to enable our Sales AEs
Collaborate with our Core Marketing team as well as extended Revenue teams
Build and run demand gen campaigns with our existing customers base and new prospects 
Develop relationships with customers and work with cross-functional teams to surface, celebrate, and amplify early customers and their inspiring stories in testimonials, referrals, speaking engagements, videos, media, and more!
Voice of the customer - advocate for the customer and consistently conduct interviews and surveys to understand pain points and areas of opportunity and strengths
Provide analytic expertise and thought leadership in support of AT&T's product and communication strategy
Manage a wide range of investigative analyses to assess the organization's present and future position with regard to competitive claims, market share and feasibility of new products
Contribute to the development of new principles and concepts.
Project or forecast future marketing needs by applying advanced marketing principles, theories and concepts to create and design strategic responses for various marketing projects.
Evaluate impact on strategic marketing planning objectives and strategies.
Applies advanced principles, theories and concepts.
Contribute to the development of new principles and concepts.
Position self as Subject Matter Expert (SME) within the discipline and an acknowledged authority within the organization
Work with Network Engineering, Marketing and external vendors to translate consumer needs into a superior and differentiated product strategy
Efficiently and effectively manage multiple, interrelated and complex data information sources
Develop, build and track performance standards to proactively manage, forecast and improve network performance
Provide periodic "standardized" reporting servicing multiple and diverse internal client groups, including network engineering, network finance, legal, field marketing, sales, advertising teams, public relations and external affairs
Develop, maintain, support and enhance continuous reporting on current and new claims through rigorous analysis of data from multiple sources
Streamline and manage all elements of data analysis and reporting for multiple diverse clients assuring timeliness, accuracy and consistency
Support routine and adhoc information needs from multiple internal clients
Collaborate and efficiently manage associated efforts of non-direct resources within and outside of AT&T
Analyze data and analytics from a variety of marketing platforms and tools
Build internal processes and identify technology that will enable the integration of analytics and insights across broader capability
Make insights-based recommendations for both brand and direct response marketing campaigns – ranging from content performance, website performance, email performance, audience performance – to help drive favorable outcomes
Work in tandem with creative team, marketing managers and project management to evaluate the effectiveness of marketing and communications content, including video, web, trade show, social media, mass and trade media, and collateral materials
Conduct research as needed to make recommendations on marketing campaigns 
12 years of relevant experience in SEM, app marketing, video marketing with track record of catalyzing step function growth in SaaS and B2B DemandGen funnels.
Bachelor’s degree with 12 years minimum related professional experience; or Master’s degree with 8 years experience without experience.
Experience managing budgets of $3-5 million dollars per month.
Deep hands-on experience with running app campaigns to deeper funnel metrics, especially as it pertains to launching an app.
Flexibility and adaptability with scope given the business growth needs.
Deep understanding of how to optimize a portfolio for growth including how to run tests with statistical rigor.
Hands-on experience with updating bids and budgets in the platform, running analyses across campaigns.
Delights in pulling data from platforms, deeply analyzing numbers and trends. and proposing opportunities at the Campaign,Adgroup, Keyword levels. 
Delights in the opportunity to grow the business, and is keen on considering many different viewpoints to ensure the best next action is taken to drive growth - may the best test win!
Direct experience with trade-off calculations and marginal return curves mindset.
Experience with Google Data Studios, and Attribution preferred.
Proactive with communication and opportunities or questions on potential issues that may arise.
Hands-on builder.
Analytical and data-driven.
Out of the box, creative thinker with a bias towards rapid testing and iterating on learnings.
Highly motivated and self-directed to achieve established goals.
Excellent written skills and highly articulate, including communicating with stakeholders.
Unparalleled attention to detail in execution on a task, project, or assignment.
Record of high academic achievement with a BS degree in Business, Economics, Engineering, Math/Science, or otherwise proven background in business/analytics. MS preferred.
5+ years of work experience in data analytics/science.
Strong understanding of statistical methods used in to elicit insights from data.
Strong analytical mindset with a drive toward actionable insights from data.
Deep interest in online marketing and media industry. Industry experience a plus.
High internal motivation with ability to understand the full stack of product development.
Willingness to initiate and own research, exploration, and analysis from start to finish for any business problem.
Good interpersonal skills and ability to remain focused-yet-flexible in a fast-paced internet company environment.
Proficiency in MS Excel, Tableau and SQL.
Familiarity with Python (preferred) or R programming to the level necessary to perform ad-hoc analysis.
Experience managing a small team
12+ years of proven product marketing experience ideally related to data management or analytics. Experience with developer marketing and driving community growth preferred 
Cross-functional team management and organizational skills, influence without authority, including senior management 
Excellent communication skills, and can engage internal leaders/teams across functions and external stakeholders 
Strong written communication skills and ability to synthesize complex information into clear and concise presentations and plans 
Demonstrated track record of building and executing successful go-to-market programs and campaigns 
Analytical mindset, interpreting and summarizing data with actionable insights 
Technical- and business-benefit understanding of prevailing and emerging data technologies, on-premises and in the cloud. Experience with database products preferred 
5+ years of experience working in the data analytics/business intelligence domain.
3+ years of experience building data models, reports and dashboards in BI tools (preferably Looker).
2+ years of working in acquisition/growth marketing domain(preferably in a B2C company)
You are a SQL expert, used to working with complex data sets; converting business problems into SQL is something that comes with ease to you.
Exposure to dimensional modeling concepts to power meaningful analytics.
Expertise in defining and building meaningful metrics and KPIs.
Ability to visualize data in different formats.
Some statistical analytics knowledge and experience(Preferably in Python)
Excellent communication, requirement gathering and prioritization skills.
Ability to narrate a story with your data and insights that you generate.
Minimum of 10 years of analytics, operations, and/or data science experience, ideally in B2C companies.
Minimum of 5 years of management and coaching experience.
Strong analytical skills, ideally including proficiency in SQL and Tableau
Willingness to roll up your sleeves, write queries, and work with large quantities of data.
Experience with and point of view on best practices for a PLG technology stack
Experience driving long term cross-functional projects and thriving as the “glue person”. This means you are exceptional at understanding complex problems and designing solutions.
Just as importantly, you are able to mobilize a cross-functional team to execute the solution.
You are highly motivated to make Cloudflare and your team successful.
Demonstrative executive presence and ability to influence at all levels of the organization.
Excellent verbal and written communication skills.
Deep knowledge or search engine optimization, as it relates to organic traffic, as well as the tools to review and manage organic results
Broad understanding of the tools of predictive and artificial intelligence; skilled in ability to provide clear and in-depth information to developers to enable use of these tools to increase quality leads and conversion of leads for appropriate targeted consumers
Fluent with SEO tools such as Google Analytics, Search Console, SEO Moz, Hot Jar, Ahrefs, SEO Clarity, etc
Strong understanding of Search Engine Optimization (SEO) and Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO) process
Solid understanding of deploying and executing "third party links" into external content to increase brand awareness of clients and increase lead generation
Experience working with various content management systems and building/administering content in multiple CMS environments (WordPress & Drupal)
Knowledge of HTML/CSS and website administration
Understanding of natural search tactics and how web metrics are tracked
Bachelor’s degree in relevant field
5-7+ years of progressive experience in Marketing, Communications or a related field
Five years of experience in successfully developing and executing SEO campaigns
Demonstrated understanding of search engine algorithms and ranking methods
Experience with SEO industry programs, such as Google Analytics and/or Adobe Analytics
Expert in keyword research and data mining tools
Demonstrated capability to complete competitive analysis of other companies within the industry
Comfortable analyzing and synthesizing high volumes of data daily
Familiarity with WordPress or other content management systems
Experience with other aspects of marketing, such as paid media, creative and promotion, is a plus
Ability to operate in ambiguity, adapting to a dynamic environment to change scope and focus with ease
Demonstrated experience working cross-functionally with internal teams and external partners, including stakeholders at all levels, to drive results
Superb organization and leadership skills, including the capacity to manage multiple projects and teams at once
Strong communication skills, both written and verbal, including the ability to summarize and escalate issues. 
A strong Executive presence and commercially-driven mindset 
Strong negotiations skills with vendors and agencies to secure agreements on mid-term (1-3 year time frame)
Ideally 7+ years of SEO experience; with a focus on content strategy
Understanding of B2B e-commerce strategy, marketing tactics and sales process. 
You are comfortable using data for both quantitative and qualitative analysis. Strong ability to frame issues, drive appropriate analyses, and make clear, impactful recommendations. 
Attention to detail with strong project management capabilities. Capable of prioritizing multiple ad hoc requests. 
Must have experience with enterprise websites, cultures, and work environments
Familiarity with popular SEO industry tools and resources including Adobe Analytics, Google Search Console, BrightEdge, Ahrefs to glean valuable insights and findings from data. 
Experience with SEO testing for content effectiveness and make adjustments to achieve business outcomes (e.g., traffic goals, page performance, search rankings, etc.)
Ability to articulate ideas in SEO documentation and setting standards for rolling out content onto the website. Familiarity with JIRA is a plus. 
Excellent written and interpersonal skills. 
Ability to thrive in a fast-paced environment and to work independently and within a team. 
Ability to learn quickly and adapt to an always evolving search industry. 
7+ years of experience in marketing or demand generation in a start-up environment
3+ years managing a high performing demand generation or product marketing team
Experience setting and managing marketing budgets
Direct experience managing paid social, SEM/SEO, email marketing, webinars or other on-the-ground demand generation strategies
Previous experience hiring, assessing, and managing contractors or agencies
Comfort with both the qualitative and quantitative sides - you can think through a quarterly campaign and large data sets
Hunger to learn and expand your skill-set
Extreme comfort working cross-functionally with sales, product management, finance, Customer Success, and other teams
Excellent problem-solving skills and the ability to work in a fast-paced environment
5+ years of experience in growth, performance or acquisition marketing.
Proven track record of success in driving growth for technical audiences.
Hands on experience building and cultivating customer funnels.
Excellent analytical and problem-solving skills.
Ability to work independently and proactively seek the most important projects.
Excellent communication and presentation skills.
Deeply analytical and quantitative
Highly comfortable managing datasets and finding insights
Experience working in a startup environment
Experience bringing a new product to market, for technical audiences
Work closely with our commercial team to understand and operationalize company goals.
Define critical opportunities to drive step-changes in user, customer and revenue growth, at every stage of the funnel. 
Prioritize the most impactful ideas to drive growth. Develop and execute marketing strategy and plans, working closely with sales and marketing leadership. 
Define our marketing channel mix, across all usable paid, owned and earned channels.
Generate and structure plans to execute on projects and campaigns. Contribute to project scoping and manage project priorities and allocation of resources within the project.
Lead creative agency engagements end-to-end, from brief to launch, on time and within budget
Produce on-brand, effective content (video, ads, copy, graphics, digital, web) to support campaign goals
Design and implement a performance measurement and analytics framework across channels
Optimize campaign performance by building and implementing intelligent testing frameworks
XP : VP
10+ years of Paid Search & Display experience
4+ years of experience in a leadership role
4+ years of quantitative analysis experience
2+ years of experience with SQL, tableau or other programming languages
Experience successfully managing SEM campaigns against aggressive ROI and growth goals
Previous experience running advertising effectiveness experiments including A/B, geographic and time-based experimentation
Big, bold thinking with a track record of developing creative/innovative solutions
Experience working in a global team and collaborating across multiple geographies
Strong communication skills (both written and verbal) with experience communicating insights and ideas


-
Archives (Docker)


We are looking for a senior digital strategist responsible for managing the day-to-day operations of paid media campaigns and SEO efforts.
q1 - explore analytics environment & etl + reporting, learn product details, product-level competitors, and status quo of performance - including teams, projects, and strategy for marketing & acquisition + business kpi’s and benchmarks; understand customers + stages
q2 - determine quick win opportunities for paid acquisition; optimizing campaigns, targeting, testing messaging & keywords, landing pages, cohort targets, bid adjustments; opportunities for content + pr → seo keyword groups, backlink acquisition strategy 
The role requires strong analytical ability to measure the effects that paid campaign changes and web content optimizations have on impressions, clicks and other conversion metrics, and to articulate those results in terms of revenue impact.
setting up data pipelines (or using 3rd party tools (acquisio, optimyzer, marin); internal pipelines for reporting feeds on cohorts that perform best based on activation, retention, and revenue


responsibilities
identify trends and insights in order to achieve maximum ROI across all paid and organic channels that hit pipeline acquisition and revenue goals.
front → growth marketing, pr, content marketing, performance marketing (paid search, display ads, video ads), social media marketing, analytics (forecasting, financial, attribution, product & marketing tracking and reporting)
google + bing ads optimization through copy & landing page targets; a/b testing messaging and tracking conversions /w down funnel tracking post acquisition (AARRR)
utilized adstage for reporting, optimization, and proving roi on ad campaigns across multiple channels (until we brought our pipeline in house)
credit sesame → drove organic contribution of total acquisition from 8.5% to 20% with a (relatively) constant budget; achieved position #1 for “free credit score” - a key driver of growth for the business
optimize the website, copy, and landing environment/lead forms/landing pages to drive results in organic and paid campaigns
credit sesame & adobe → running ~5 a/b tests per week optimizing messaging in paid acquisition before migrating successful campaigns into SEO landing pages
optimizely, in-house tooling (course hero)
messaging lessons commonly show that tangible & concrete value is vital to conversion - but not always retention and ltv of customer
intent behind searches to optimize landing pages; ex. “adobe photo editing” - longtail keywords helped us hone in on messaging, problem recognition, etc. to optimize feature showcase
optimizing title tags improved our ctr + avg. pos.
perform ongoing keyword discovery, expansion, and optimization including updating competitive sets assessments
good
develop and implement link building strategy
good
work with editorial and marketing teams to drive seo in content creation and content programming
joy→  within 3 months improved the avg. position of the core keyword “wedding websites” from 12 to 1
recommend changes to website architecture, content, linking, and other factors to improve SEO positions for target keywords and audiences
good
design and propose seo experiments to test new techniques and strategies for growth
credit sesame → content structure & readability, data-focused storytelling; improving bounce rates, time on page, conversion, pages per session
adobe → title tag & meta optimization (ctr, ranking), crawling optimization for index bloat (ranking), internal linking & crawl depth (ranking), content intent adjustment (bounce rates, cr)
using two cohorts - crawl depth testing; analyze crawl rate, frequency, and ranking change while hold certain variables constant over 30 days
partner with campaign managers and growth operations in all aspects of campaign execution including nurturing leads, proper data flow, lead routing and lead scoring.
good


qualifications
proven seo, sem,and ppc experience
good
solid understanding of performance marketing, conversion, and online customer acquisition
aarrr, cac, ltv as core metrics of optimization

in-depth experience with website analytics tools (e.g, google analytics, adobe, etc.)
google ad manager, adobe advertising cloud, inhouse custom tooling

experience with bid management tools (e.g., kenshoo)
marin, adroll, acquisio

working knowledge of html, css, etc. development and constraints including technical seo
good

up-to-date with the latest trends and best practices in seo and sem
good

knowledge of ranking factors and search engine algorithms
good







Analytics Jobs Research
Analytics Job Titles
Senior Manager, Analytics
Senior Web Analyst (Remote)
Senior Manager Analytics
Marketing Analytics Lead
Analytics Engineer
Marketing Analytics Manager
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
Sr. Manager, Business Intelligence
Manager, Digital Analytics
Senior Director of Analytics
Director of Analytics
Analytics Engineer
Manager, Web Analytics
Director of Consumer Data and Analytics
Senior Manager, Sales Analytics and Insights
Sr. Analyst, Growth Analytics
Manager of Data & Analytics
Analytics Engineer
Data Analyst, Marketing and Growth
Director of Data Analytics
Data Scientist - Marketing
Growth Analytics Manager
Analytics Manager, Business Intelligence & Reporting
Strategy and Analytics Senior Lead

Analytics Responsibilities (Grouped)
testing, measurement, post analysis
a/b, multivariate, reporting env., dashboards
identify opportunities, digital experience
lead, manage team
translate business problems, analytical frameworks, models
partner w/ business, product, models utilized, accurate, actionable for results
report, present model results, recommendations, leadership
drive continous improvement, feedback loop
Analytics Responsibilities
Build the platform that allows data analysts, product managers, marketers and other heavy data users to model their own data as well as making that data available in tools of their choosing, such as product analytics tools, BI tools, an experimentation platform or our CRM system.
Continue leading the transformation to make data a first-class citizen in software development at Linktree. This includes defining standards and providing guidance to product teams who emit the vast majority of our data.
Build and maintaining robust, efficient and integrated data models. We don’t believe that Analytics Engineers should be painfully cleaning up after others and deal with bad data all day long, if you are faced with a “garbage in, garbage out” situation, you will work with the engineers in our product teams to come up with a better way to emit the raw data.
You will also provide support to other data users including peer-reviews, training and acting as a data modelling/SQL/dbt SME across various business initiatives.


Build and Develop dashboards that will visualize data and make it more easily leveraged
Strong ability to manage Completions operations projects while utilizing technology to enhance automation
Evaluation and implementation of opportunities for improving workflow processes and automation of processes
Create applications using available tools for field users to make real-time decisions during frac and drill out operations
Develop and manage processes for generation and maintenance of accurate datasets and reporting of key metrics
Analyze data to identify reasons for under/over performance, and recommend actions to improve performance
Understand analytical theories and best practices to solve problems in daily operations
Construct forecasting models and communicate outcomes to management
Support with project budgeting and monthly accruals
Analyze costs to understand variance from performance targets and cost projections
Work closely with leadership to identify and reduce non-productive time and manual processes
Communicate and interact with operations and support departments to deliver information/data needs and requests in a timely fashion


Translate business requirements by business team into data and engineering specifications
Build scalable data sets based on specifications from the available raw data and derive business metrics/insights
Understand and Identify server APIs that needs to be instrumented for data analytics and align events for execution in already established data pipelines
Explore and understand sophisticated data sets, identify and formulate correlational rules between heterogenous sources for effective analytics and reporting
Process, clean and validate the integrity of data used for analysis
Develop Python and Shell Scripts for data ingestion and stitching from external data sources for business insights
Partner with data scientists to build scalable modeling features pipeline
Work closely with analytics and data science teams to develop robust data pipeline and analytics visualization


Lead and oversee the design, development, and implementation of analytics engineering solutions, ensuring they align with business objectives and standard methodologies.
Mentor and provide guidance to junior analytics engineers, assisting them in technical problem-solving and skill development.
Stay updated with emerging trends and technologies in the field of data analytics, evaluating their potential for adoption and driving innovation within the team.
Act as a subject matter expert, providing expert-level advice and guidance on complex data analytics projects and initiatives.
Collaborate with cross-functional teams, data scientists, and business partners to gather requirements and design scalable data architectures to meet analytics needs.
Develop and optimize data pipelines, and data workflows to ensure efficient and reliable data processing.
Design and optimize data models and queries to extract valuable insights from complex and large-scale datasets.
Apply data visualization tools and techniques to communicate analytical findings to technical and non-technical partners.
Collaborate with data scientists and business partners to understand their analytical requirements and provide technical solutions that drive data-driven decision-making.
Collaborate with cross-functional teams, partners, and executives to understand their analytics needs, provide strategic guidance, and align analytics initiatives with business goals.
Communicate complex technical concepts, analytical findings, and project progress in a clear and concise manner to non-technical partners.
Work closely with data engineers and analysts to integrate analytics solutions into existing systems and applications.
Foster a collaborative and innovative team environment, promoting knowledge sharing, standard methodologies, and continuous learning.


Create and maintain ETL data pipelines to support growth marketing
Design, develop, and implement data models and pipelines in a scalable and optimal data architect using SQL, python, and big data technologies.
Assemble large and complex datasets from various data sources into formats that can be effectively utilized by growth analysts and growth marketers
Automate manual process, and optimize internal/external data delivering pipelines
Identify data processing improvement, re-design data infrastructure, and implement the optimizations
Develop highly governed growth data with clear definitions, manage it closely for quality and changes, and ensure data accessibility at all times
Build analytics tools that utilize data pipelines to assist analytics team in building industry leading data products on reporting and measurement
Partner with internal business stakeholders, our engineering teams, as well as external vendors


Build and own optimal data pipelines delivering well-defined, tested, documented, and code-reviewed shared data sets to support analysis, reporting, mathematical modeling, and BI tooling
Proactively identify operational pain points and inefficiencies with cross-functional partners and develop new tools and automated process to solve them
Partner with key stakeholders across business functions to build dashboards and other BI tools that deliver insights and enable self-service
Build ingestion infrastructure using a mix of ETL/ELT tooling (e.g., Fivetran, Xplenty) and hand-rolled scripts
Work with other early hires and team leadership to set direction and processes for the team based on your own experiences
Curate data infrastructure to comply with data privacy, security, and governance requirements
Conduct root cause analysis
Create data dictionaries that promote shared understanding, accessibility, and operational efficiency


Build and manage robust data pipelines to extract, transform, and load data from source systems to target destinations, ensuring data integrity and reliability using cloud technology such as AWS, Airflow, Redshift, S3, Glue, HUDI framework etc.
Develop, deploy, and maintain data processing pipelines using cloud technology such as AWS, Airflow, Redshift, EMR.
Structuring and transforming datasets for multiple complex use cases, user stories, and related requirements within the Data Analytics and Product Team
Identify and resolve performance bottlenecks in data processing and storage systems, optimizing queries, and improve the overall data pipeline efficiency.
Collaborate with cross-functional teams, including data scientists, analysts, and software engineers, to understand data requirements and provide reliable and accessible data solutions.
Drive code reviews and summarize complex data into usable, digestible datasets.


Data architecture: Evaluate data platform architecture. Build and optimize data services to improve compliance, security, reliability, performance, and resource utilization.
Compliance: Build process and tools to ensure that the data platform is compliant with SOX (Sarbanes-Oxley Act), GLBA (Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ), and CCPA (California Consumer Privacy Act).
Security: Identify infrastructure security-relevant actions, tests, and key performance indicators. Enhances the security posture of the Compass data platform, ensuring the protection of data, systems, and assets.
Infrastructure automation: Increases reliability, enhances employee productivity, reduces security attack surfaces, and eliminates human errors through standardization of process and Infrastructure as Code.
Data infrastructure monitoring. Monitor the platform health, reliability, cost, and usage.
Best practices and guardrails: Champion the best practices and guardrails for using the data platform. Identify cost-saving opportunities and optimize the data platform for all stakeholders.
Operational support: Support the platform users for troubleshooting, configuration, version updates, and feature adoptions.


Pragmatic and commercially minded analytics engineer, interested in being part of the core development of our data products
Experience in SQL and dbt in a cloud data warehouse environment (Snowflake, BigQuery, Redshift, etc.). Experience in Python (or R) is ideal as well. Experience working with multiple (external) datasets, cleaning, joining, and munging data; experience working with public data sources (ie. US Census, ACS Survey) is a huge plus
Articulate and scrappy; must be willing to wear multiple hats and change context frequently


Collaborates regularly with functional areas of the business to understand analytics needs for potential projects
Gather requirements of data project(s), work with team members on solution, build and deploy solution
Develops, deploys, and maintains batch data pipelines (currently using Alteryx Designer)
Monitors quality of data, fix pipeline errors, and address schema changes in data sources
Creates and alters database objects in target storage (Oracle), based on new data sources, user requirements, and governance
Models and serves high quality data to stakeholders based on needs, best practices, and overall BI strategy
Works closely with analysts on their pain points or new requirements for existing solutions and guide them in their utilization of the data and development of KPIs/metrics
Manages accesses of users, work spaces, and gateways on Power BI Cloud
Assists in leading the continuous development of overall BI strategy
Is an ambassador for data-driven thinking at every level of the organization


Take the data products to the next level by developing scalable data models
Manage transformations of data after load of raw data through both technical processes and business logic
Create an inventory of the data sources and documents needed to implement self-service analytics
Define quality standards of the data and partner with the analytics team to define minimum acceptance criteria for the data sources
Data cataloging & documentation of the data sources
Regularly meet with business partners and analytics teams to understand and solve data needs, short-term and medium-term
Build trust with internal stakeholders to encourage data-driven decision-making
Work with all organizations to continually grow the value of our data products by onboarding new data from our backend and 3rd party systems


Data-Driven Culture: You will be an ambassador for our data-driven culture, taking data and shaping it to facilitate analysis, insight generation, and decision-making
Data Management: You will ingest, clean and organize raw data in a way that makes sense for both you and the team
Project Management: You will lead data projects from ingestion to reporting, showing your ability to manage scope and work with ambiguity
Collaborative Execution: You will liaise between Business, Engineering, and Data to translate business requirements into proper data capture and schema design
Data Strategy: You will help shape the data model at Super, which will advance our broader analytics strategy
Teamwork: You will coach data analysts and junior analytics engineers, helping them level-up technically and adopt software-engineering best practices


Bachelor's degree in Computer Science, a related technical field, or equivalent practical experience.
Experience analyzing data and creating reports with database query (e.g., SQL) and visualization tools (e.g., Tableau, Dashboards).
Experience with one or more general purpose programming languages: Python, C/C++, or Java.
Knowledge of Machine Learning (ML) and Big Data Infrastructure.
Excellent communication and presentation skills.


Collaborate with Google Home App (GHA), Home Graph and other Platform engineering team to ensure infrastructure supports key analyses by identifying logging gaps. Build or Modify new/existing data pipelines for tracking GHA metrics.
Conduct end-to-end analysis that includes data gathering and requirements specification, processing, analysis, ongoing deliverables, and presentations.
Act as a thought partner to produce insights and metrics for various technical and business stakeholders across the Smart Home Platforms teams.
Deliver presentations of findings and recommendations to leadership, creating visual displays of quantitative information.
Make business recommendations with the presentations of findings at multiple levels of stakeholders through visual displays of quantitative information.


Be our go-to data expert and have a deep understanding of our data warehouse and data processing layers.
Partner with data analytics, product managers, engineers, data scientists, and business stakeholders to obtain a holistic understanding of each team’s data needs and translate into infrastructure and tooling that enables a data-driven culture.
Own data integrity, availability, transformation logic, and efficient data access to support the growing needs of the organization.
Identify gaps in existing data, create data product specs, and work with Engineering teams to implement data tracking.
Incorporate automation wherever possible to improve data pipelines and analyses
Create testing and monitoring systems to ensure data quality and observability
Build and maintain documentation to ensure data accessibility to all stakeholders


Design, develop, and maintain new data capabilities and infrastructure for utilizing Mastercard, third-party, and partner data to enhance Mastercard's data products and solutions
Create new data pipelines, data transfers, and compliance-oriented infrastructure to facilitate seamless data utilization within cloud environments
Identify existing data capability and infrastructure gaps or opportunities within and across initiatives and provide subject matter expertise in support of remediation
Collaborate with technical team and business stakeholders to understand data requirements and translate them into technical solutions
Work with large datasets, ensuring data quality, accuracy, and performance
Implement data transformation, integration, and validation processes to support analytics and reporting needs
Optimize and fine-tune data pipelines for improved speed, reliability, and efficiency
Implement best practices for data storage, retrieval, and archival to ensure data accessibility and security
Troubleshoot and resolve data-related issues, collaborating with the team to identify root causes
Document data processes, data lineage, and technical specifications for future reference
Participate in code reviews, ensuring adherence to coding standards and best practices
Collaborate with DevOps teams to automate deployment and monitoring of data pipelines


Translate business requirements by business team into data and engineering specifications
Build scalable data sets based on specifications from the available raw data and derive business metrics/insights
Understand and Identify server APIs that needs to be instrumented for data analytics and align events for execution in already established data pipelines
Explore and understand sophisticated data sets, identify and formulate correlational rules between heterogenous sources for effective analytics and reporting
Process, clean and validate the integrity of data used for analysis
Develop Python and Shell Scripts for data ingestion and stitching from external data sources for business insights
Partner with data scientists to build scalable modeling features pipeline
Work closely with analytics and data science teams to develop robust data pipeline and analytics visualization


You’ll be working with a variety of internal teams -- Engineering, Business -- to help them solve their data needs
Your work will provide teams with visibility into how Stripe’s products are being used and how we can better serve our customers
Identify data needs for business and product teams, understand their specific requirements for metrics and analysis, and build efficient and scalable data pipelines to enable data-driven decisions across Stripe
Design, develop, and own data pipelines and models that power internal analytics for product and business teams
Help the Data Science team apply and generalize statistical and econometric models on large datasets
Drive the collection of new data and the refinement of existing data sources, develop relationships with production engineering teams to manage our data structures as the Stripe product evolves
Develop strong subject matter expertise and manage the SLAs for those data pipelines


Empathize with new data and prototype new data products to inform the overall roadmap
Transform, model and deliver raw data into usable, documented data products at an appropriate quality to application and business consumers
Work directly with cross-functional stakeholders to collect business requirements and subject matter expertise to design data models and success outcomes or quality criteria
Communicate and disseminate technical and domain-specific learnings to a wide range of stakeholders
Implement and measure key metrics alongside data transforms to maintain and improve data quality over time


Work with the team leader to set technical direction and strategy for the team
Cultivate a culture of technical mentorship and leadership, upskilling our team and elevating our collective capabilities
Construct robust data processing and analysis pipelines
Ensure code quality and efficiency are never compromised


Owner of the core company data pipeline, responsible for scaling up data processing flow to meet the rapid data growth at Lyft
Evolve data model and data schema based on business and engineering needs
Implement systems tracking data quality and consistency
Develop tools supporting self-service data pipeline management (ETL)
SQL and MapReduce job tuning to improve data processing performance
Write well-crafted, well-tested, readable, maintainable code
Participate in code reviews to ensure code quality and distribute knowledge
Unblock, support and communicate with internal & external partners to achieve results


Demonstrates ability to communicate technical concepts to non-technical audiences both in written and verbal form.
Assembles large, complex data sets to meet business requirements.
Works in tandem with Data Architects to align on data architecture requirements provided by the latter.
Creates and maintains optimal data pipeline architecture.
Identifies, designs, and implements internal process improvements: automating manual processes, optimizing data delivery.
Implements big data and NoSQL solutions by developing scalable data processing platforms to drive high-value insights to the organization.
Supports development of Data Dictionaries and Data Taxonomy for product solutions.
Demonstrates strong understanding with coding and programming concepts to build data pipelines (e.g. data transformation, data quality, data integration, etc.).
Builds data models with Data Architect and develops data pipelines to store data in defined data models and structures.
Demonstrates strong understanding of data integration techniques and tools (e.g. Extract, Transform, Load (ETL) / Extract, Load, Transform (ELT)) and database architecture.
Demonstrates strong understanding of database storage concepts (data lake, relational databases, NoSQL, Graph, data warehousing).
Identifies ways to improve data reliability, efficiency, and quality of data management.
Conducts ad-hoc data retrieval for business reports and dashboards.
Assesses the integrity of data from multiple sources.
Manages database configuration including installing and upgrading software, and maintaining relevant documentation.
Monitors database activity and resource usage.
Performs peer review for another Data Engineer’s work.
Develops and operationalizes data pipelines to make data available for consumption (BI, Advanced analytics, Services).
Works in tandem with data architects and data/BI engineers to design data pipelines and recommends ongoing optimization of data storage, data ingestion, data quality, and orchestration.
Designs, develops, and implements ETL/ELT processes using IICS (Informatica cloud).
Uses Azure services, such as Azure SQL DW (Synapse), ADLS, Azure Event Hub, Azure Data Factory to improve and speed up delivery of our data products and services.
Communicates technical concepts to non-technical audiences both in written and verbal form.


BA/BS in Computer Science, Engineering, or equivalent software/services experience.
Azure Certifications.
Experience implementing data integration techniques, such as event/message based integration (Kafka, Azure Event Hub), ETL.
Experience with Git / Azure DevOps.
Experience delivering data solutions through agile software development methodologies.
Exposure to the retail industry.
Excellent verbal and written communication skills.
Experience working with SAP integration tools including BODS.
Experience with UC4 Job Scheduler.


Work closely with stakeholders in engineering, finance, sales, marketing, strategy, and governance to make high quality datasets available to consumers in a timely manner
Develop data pipelines adhering with privacy and governance principles
Become familiar with our data consumption portals and their capabilities
Build expertise and ownership of data quality for supported domains
Build tooling and implement systems to overcome limitations of the data consumption portals when appropriate
Drive adoption of the data sets you’ve produced


Model, design, develop, test and implement the appropriate backend and front-end structures needed to meet business visualization and reporting requirements.
Leverage industry-leading integration and analytics tools to build a modern data warehouse that is accurate, reliable, high performing and easily accessible to our business departments.
Build dashboard to follow wireframes designs, integrate with backend data models. Build aggregate data models. Manage the data flow to reflect in dashboards to meet business requirements.
Data formatting and processing to build the foundation layer for dashboards and self-service reporting. Work on data transformation, using the ETL tools. Build dimension views and fact tables.
Interact with the client business community to gather/develop functional and technical requirements and translate them into reporting solutions.
Responsible for the full life cycle of development, from requirements gathering through data transformation coding and report/dashboard design and creation.
Follow development standards in accordance with UA best practices.
Work with Enterprise Data Analysts team to clarify functional requirements and create the TSD's.
Data formatting and processing to build the foundation layer for dashboards and self-service reporting.
Troubleshoot data anomalies with engineering teams.
Work on data transformation, using the ETL tools. Build dimension views and fact tables.
Responsible for daily support of the data warehouse and associated data marts


Coordinate with Data Platform Engineering team, Enterprise Data Analyst Team, Data Governance Team, and IT Teams to align with change management processes and to ensure performance, processes and access is optimal for our global reporting solutions.
Work collaboratively to align business requirements with reporting and analytical solutions.
Improve processes regarding data flow and quality to improve data accuracy, viability and value
Document development for peer reference and knowledge transfer.
Interact with the client business community to gather/develop functional and technical requirements and translate them into visualization solutions.
Educate and empower the business community towards self-serve reporting model.


Ship high-quality, well-tested, secure, and maintainable code.
Design, develop, and maintain data pipelines and back-end services for real-time decisioning, reporting, optimization, data collection, and related functions.
Manage automated unit and integration test suites.
Work collaboratively and communicate effectively with a small, motivated team of engineers and product managers.
Experiment with and recommend new technologies that simplify or improve the tech stack.
Participate in an on-call rotation and work occasional off-hours.


Be responsible for comprehensive data analysis, from gathering business requirements and formulating hypotheses, to conducting in-depth data analysis and applying statistical and predictive modeling techniques. You will also develop visualizations/dashboards and effectively communicate findings and actionable insights to both business stakeholders and non-technical audiences.
Work with lifecycle marketing data from both third-party vendors (such as Iterable, Census) and our internal data warehouse.
Support business stakeholders in devising and implementing holistic lifecycle marketing strategies aimed at enhancing customer acquisition, retention, and engagement.
Design and execute A/B tests to confirm hypotheses and perform campaign performance analysis.
Offer decision-making support and recommendations to business owners, based on data-driven analysis. This includes conducting comprehensive analysis and delivering data narratives across various business groups.
Foster and lead productive, positive collaborations with one or more cross-functional teams.
Construct, manage, and communicate detailed reports, visualizations, and other tools to provide business insights and demonstrate business health.

Analytics Qualifications (Grouped)
data wrangling, modeling, python, sql, cloud, snowflake, sagemaker
best-practice modeling techniques, price elasticity, consumer demand, experimental design, time-series analysis, forecasting
synthesize data, model results into insights, reocmmendations
communication skills, expectations, alignment

Analytics Qualifications
A platform mindset. Data teams main focus is not to do repetitive data transformation and integration jobs for others. The team builds the infrastructure and tools that allows Linktree to perform these tasks at scale by enabling all teams to perform data-related jobs themselves.
You understand data-driven product development and have experience with the typical tools used by high-performing product teams, such product analytics, experimentation, but also general purpose BI tools.
Experience in data modelling with the ability to translate business requirements to fit for purpose data products for critical use-cases (reporting to the board, understanding key drivers of product success).
Experience operating at scale. You have worked on data systems that power a product that serves hundreds of millions of active users.
Proficient in SQL and experience with working on cloud-based warehouses (experience in Snowflake is a bonus), as well as working with DBT.


(Ideally) At least 5+ years of experience leveraging Azure Cloud for data optimization/analytics
Hands-on experience completing the ETL process within Azure Data Lakes
pulling aggregated data from Azure Data Lake (they use a 3rd party aggregation company)
Must be able to create/build out Azure pipelines for Azure instances
Hands-on experience with the following tools:
R / Python (R preferred, if no R, must be strong within Python) – ability to script from scratch
PowerBI
SQL – Building basic and complex queries from scratch
Hands-on experience with Real-time processing tools within Azure
Azure Synapse Analytics, Azure Data Explorer, HBase, Spark, Hive (All examples)
Experience working with very large/complex sets of data (millions of rows)
Experience collecting similar/domain relevant data to the following:
Sensor Data from the field
Flow Data/Time Series Data
Event Detection Data (Oil pressure, Sand, Water, etc.)


Bachelor’s degree with 7+ years of experience OR Masters Degree with 6+ years of experience OR PhD with 2+ years of experience
Degree preferably in engineering, economics, statistics, computer science, or related quantitative field.
Relevant professional experience with Big Data systems, pipelines and data processing
Preferred experience in Applied Econometrics, Statistics, Data Mining, Machine Learning, Analytics, Mathematics, Operations Research, Industrial Engineering, or related field
Practical hands-on experience with technologies like Apache Hadoop, Apache Pig, Apache Hive, Apache Sqoop & Apache Spark
Experience working in Dataiku is a plus but not required
Ability to understand API Specs, identify relevant API calls , extract data and implement data pipelines & SQL-friendly data structures
Identify Data Validation rules and alerts based on data publishing specifications for data integrity and anomaly detection
Understanding on various distributed file formats such as Apache AVRO, Apache Parquet and common methods in data transformation
Expertise in Python, Unix Shell scripting and Dependency driven job schedulers
Expertise in Core JAVA, Oracle, Teradata and ANSI SQL
Familiarity with rule based tools and APIs for multi stage data correlation on large data sets is a plus!
Candidate demonstrates a breadth of diverse leadership experiences and capabilities including: the ability to influence and collaborate with peers, develop and coach others, oversee and guide the work of other colleagues to achieve meaningful outcomes and create business impact.


4-6 years of experience in a data engineering or analytics role, with a focus on designing and implementing data analytics solutions.
Bachelor's or master's degree in Computer Science, Data Science, or a related field.
Proficiency in SQL is a must. Bonus - Python or R
DBT and Looker experience is preferred
Experience with data manipulation, analysis, and visualization libraries and tools.
Strong knowledge of data modeling and standard methodologies.
Expertise in statistical analysis, machine learning algorithms, and predictive modeling techniques is a plus.
Familiarity with data warehouse technologies and cloud platforms (e.g. AWS, GCP).
Excellent leadership and mentoring abilities, with a proven track record of successfully leading data analytics projects.
Strong problem-solving skills, attention to detail, and ability to work with complex datasets.


7+ years of experience designing, building, and optimizing data pipelines and architectures at large scale and extreme complexity.
Advanced SQL knowledge and experience working with relational databases, query authoring, as well as experience with a variety of databases.
Experience with DBT, Databricks, or similar workflow management tools
Experience using Python for data table creation in databricks


3+ yrs. working as a Data Engineer or Analytics Engineer
Fluency in SQL
Proven background collaborating with cross-functional stakeholders and implementing end-to-end data solutions that help them do their jobs
Experience writing bare-knuckle data ingestion scripts with orchestration (e.g., via python/docker/airflow)
Experience using APIs to pull in data from external vendors
Substantial Experience building data models to be consumed by analysts, data scientists, and BI technology (such as Power BI, Tableau, Excel, Looker)
1+ yrs. working in a cloud data warehouse (Preferred: snowflake)
Understanding of data warehouse practices and concepts
Strong communication and collaboration skills
Experience with business analytics tools such as Tableau, Hex, Mode, Deepnote, Domo, Data studio, Looker etc.
Solid command of DBT
Substantial experience working with unstructured or semi-structured data (JSON, XML)
(Major bonus points) Experience working with onboarding, implementation, or customer journey health is a big plus
(Major Bonus Points) Experience using Salesforce Canvas to embed BI artifacts is a big plus
(Bonus points) Experience in a role regularly requiring ROI / Impact estimation
(Bonus points) Ability to analyze data using basic statistical methods, interprets results, and provide written and graphical summaries of data analyses
(Bonus points) Experience with SSIS
(Bonus Points) General purpose object-oriented programming skills (Python, C#, Java) outside of ETLs


Advanced data modeling experience, strong SQL concepts skills, and understanding ETL
Experience handling subscription data models, including enrollment, billing, churn, and customer segmentation
Advanced experience with Snowflake
Experience with advanced data analytics, data transformation and data management projects
Dimensional modeling and business intelligence concepts
Experience with commercial and emerging reporting tools and technologies (e.g. Tableau, ThoughtSpot)
Experience in Web-scale databases, Hadoop, PostGre or NoSQL technologies is a plus
Experience with big data and related data analytics and experience with R, Python or similar statistics tools is desirable
Knowledge of predictive analytics, statistics and modeling techniques to develop and improve sophistication of Business Intelligence solutions
In-depth experience of analyzing data and creating reports, data profiling, understanding anomaly detection and working with data to identify trends and make recommendations
Able to quickly learn new and existing technologies
Strong attention to detail and excellent analytical capabilities
Excellent oral and written interpersonal skills
Self-motivated, dedicated and solution-oriented individual


Bachelor’s degree in computer science or related discipline; or equivalent years of experience
At least 5+ years of experience building data pipelines using modern big data architectures
Experience with AWS Ecosystem like Redshift, Athena, DynamoDB, Glue, Airflow and S3
Expert knowledge in writing complex SQL and ETL development using large datasets.
Experience integrating data using streaming technologies such as Kinesis Firehose, Kafka and from multiple data sources and file types such as JSON, Parquet, and Avro formats.
The ability to work independently to understand and resolve a diverse range of complex problems


8 years of development experience with a focus on architecting cloud data platforms, setting up, managing and automating the infrastructure of cloud data platforms, including Airflow, Databricks, Spark, and Kafka
5 years of developer experience using Infrastructure as Code (IaC) technologies, such as AWS Cloud Formation and Terraform
3 years of experience with data compliance and governance. Demonstration of collaboration with the internal compliance team and external auditors in planning and execution of all phases of SOX compliance including risk assessment & scoping, documentation of process walkthroughs, identifying controls and key reports, testing, and reporting results. Implement customer data deletion requests that are required by CCPA. Standardize and automate the compliance process.
5 years of experience maintaining and improving OE of data platforms - service alerting, monitoring,and automation.
8 years of experience and proficient programming skills in Python or Java/C#. 3 years of programming experience in SQL.
B.S., M.S., or PhD. in Computer Science or equivalent


Subject matter expert (SME) in architecting cloud data platforms using Databricks, Snowflake, AWS Lake Formation or other relevant technologies.
SME in big data technologies including Spark, Presto, Airflow, Kafka
Work in a startup-like environment building agile products and services
Create clear and concise documentation, including diagrams, service descriptions, decisions, and runbooks.
Deep knowledge of cloud platform such as AWS, GCP, Azure
Proven records of improving services in your domain throughout their lifecycle. Identify and remove bottlenecks to address inefficiencies in the developer experience.


Work with a variety of data sources to create derived data products that answer business questions; in practice, this means creating data pipelines out of SQL, Python, dbt, and orchestration tools
Communicate Streamlit team on pipeline design, data quality, and data documentation and use cases
Report to the Head of Product and assist him in executing our data product vision.
Work closely with across marketing, engineering, and Streamlit teams to support GTM efforts on projects such as such as demos, documentation, and use cases
Interact with customers on a regular basis, including for technical support and feedback to help inform our product roadmap


Bachelor’s Degree in data-oriented, math, or technology field (Engineering, Software development, CS, Mathematics, Business Analytics, Data Science, etc…) or 8 years commensurate experience
5+ years in a technical data role (Data Engineer, Analytics Engineer, Data Analyst, BI Developer, etc…)
Strong communication and analytical skills, with the ability to translate technical topics for all audiences
Entrepreneurial approach to problem-solving and ability to manage ambiguity
Experience profiling, wrangling, and transforming data via tools or programming languages (e.g., python, R, Alteryx, Knime, dbt, etc…)
Experience with developing data pipelines
A strong understanding of ELT principles (e.g., data source behavior, change capture, full vs incremental loading)
Professional knowledge and comfortability using SQL (CRUD operations, transformations, windows functions, CTE, sub-queries)
Experience managing an RDBMS (creating and managing users and schemas, tables, views, stored procedures, roles, etc.…)
Deep understanding of normalization and other concepts around data modeling (grain, aggregations, facts and dimensions, primary and foreign keys, cardinality, etc.…)
Experience in developing data visualizations (Power BI, Tableau, Qlik, etc.…)
Desire to learn different technologies and platforms is a plus


5+ years of experience with SQL, preferably for data transformation or analytical use cases
4+ years of experience building scalable data models for analytical and BI purposes
3+ years solid experience with dbt
Mastery of data warehouse methodologies and techniques from transactional databases to dimensional data modeling, to wide denormalized data marts
Solid experience with BI tools like Tableau and Looker
Experience using version control (command-line, Git)
Familiarity with one of the data warehouses like Google Big Query, Snowflake, Redshift, Databricks
Domain expertise in one or more of the Finance, Product, Marketing, Operations, Customer Experience
Demonstrated experience engaging and influencing senior leaders across functions, including an ability to communicate effectively with both business and technical teams
Strong analytical and quantitative skills with the ability to use data and metrics to back up assumptions and recommendations to drive actions
Ability to articulate vision, mission, and objectives, and change the narrative appropriate to the audience


3+ years of work experience as an analytics engineer, data engineer, or full-stack data analyst
You are experienced in SQL, with an emphasis on writing performant code
You are a data modelling expert and have designed schemas before at previous organizations, ideally using DBT
You have a strong understanding of data warehouses and the modern data stack
You have a track record of delivering projects, including datasets that were used to drive key business decisions
You can self-serve by building ELT pipelines and reverse ETL pipelines using off-the-shelf tools, Airbyte connectors, or simple DAGs in Airflow leveraging Python
You have experience leveraging tools for data governance, data quality testing, and documentation
You can clearly communicate about technical subjects to non-technical people, and behave as a liaison between Business, Engineering, and Analytics


Bachelor's degree in Computer Science, a related technical field, or equivalent practical experience.
Experience analyzing data and creating reports with database query (e.g., SQL) and visualization tools (e.g., Tableau, Dashboards).
Experience with one or more general purpose programming languages: Python, C/C++, or Java.
Knowledge of Machine Learning (ML) and Big Data Infrastructure.
Excellent communication and presentation skills.


Bachelor’s in Engineering, Business, Information Systems, or other quantitative discipline
4+ years of professional experience architecting and building data models that integrate complex and disparate data sources, using tools such as dbt
2+ years of professional experience building, maintaining reporting, and dashboards in various enterprise Business Intelligence platforms, such as LookerBusiness Intelligence platforms, such as Looker
Expert in SQL and database table design - able to write structured and efficient queries on large data sets
Experience and strong knowledge of data warehousing concepts, big data technologies, and analytics platforms. Redshift, Azure, and/or Snowflake experience strongly preferred
Experience working in git workflows
Excellent communication skills to work with stakeholders to translate business needs and ideas into tractable work items.
Top-notch organizational skills and ability to manage multiple projects in a fast-paced environment
Move fast, be a team player, always be learning, and give back
Preferred Qualifications
Master’s degree in Engineering, Business, Information Systems, or other quantitative discipline
Experience with ETL/ELT tools (bonus points for dbt!)


Bachelor's or Master's degree in Computer Science, Engineering, or a related field
Proven experience in data engineering, with a strong track record of designing and implementing data solutions
Proficiency in programming languages such as Python, Java, or Scala, and experience with data processing frameworks (Spark, Hadoop, etc.)
In-depth understanding of data warehousing concepts, cloud platforms (AWS, Azure, GCP), and data modeling techniques
Strong knowledge of SQL and NoSQL databases, as well as data integration and transformation tools
Passion for and engagement with emerging trends in data, AI/ML, analytics, and digital experiences
Experience in data product development, analytical models, and model governance
Experience in anonymizing data and managing the use of data
Experience in data hygiene procedures, identity resolution capabilities or data management a plus
Ability to create strategies and plans that define how information can be utilized to support an organization's overall business strategy, and how that information and data is organized, and governed inside an organization
Strong project management skills and a demonstrated ability to understand complex information product constructs
Familiarity with industry best practices for collection and use of data
Outstanding problem-solving skills and the ability to navigate complex data challenges
Effective communication and collaboration skills to work with both technical and non-technical stakeholders
Experience with agile methodologies and DevOps practices


In-depth understanding of data structures and algorithms
Programming experience in building high quality software.
Skills with Java, Python or Scala preferred
Experience in crafting and developing ETL data pipelines. Should be proficient in writing Advanced SQLs, Expertise in performance tuning of SQLs
Demonstrate strong understanding of development processes and agile methodologies
Ability to partner with technical business teams, ensuring that the Data Team is actively engaging
Developing a deep understanding of current data needs, as well as driving data strategy for GBI
Hands-on experience engineering and documenting process flows
Validated expertise with Tableau, SQL and other data visualization tools
Hands-on experience leading technology projects and ability to drive cooperation between Data Team, Application Managers and the rest of GBI
Excellent problem solving abilities
Able to effectively coordinate work and communication across disparate groups of individuals and levels in the organization
Thrive in a multifaceted environment, maintaining poise and a positive attitude
Strong analytical and communication skills
Self-driven, highly motivated and ability to learn quick
Ability to work in a rapidly changing environment, perform optimally under dynamic conditions such as directional changes, tight deadlines and limited resources, is a must
Organizational skills and the ability to multi-task are important


Bachelor’s degree with 7+ years of experience OR Masters Degree with 6+ years of experience OR PhD with 2+ years of experience
Degree preferably in engineering, economics, statistics, computer science, or related quantitative field.
Relevant professional experience with Big Data systems, pipelines and data processing
Preferred experience in Applied Econometrics, Statistics, Data Mining, Machine Learning, Analytics, Mathematics, Operations Research, Industrial Engineering, or related field
Practical hands-on experience with technologies like Apache Hadoop, Apache Pig, Apache Hive, Apache Sqoop & Apache Spark
Experience working in Dataiku is a plus but not required
Ability to understand API Specs, identify relevant API calls , extract data and implement data pipelines & SQL-friendly data structures
Identify Data Validation rules and alerts based on data publishing specifications for data integrity and anomaly detection
Understanding on various distributed file formats such as Apache AVRO, Apache Parquet and common methods in data transformation
Expertise in Python, Unix Shell scripting and Dependency driven job schedulers
Expertise in Core JAVA, Oracle, Teradata and ANSI SQL
Familiarity with rule based tools and APIs for multi stage data correlation on large data sets is a plus!
Candidate demonstrates a breadth of diverse leadership experiences and capabilities including: the ability to influence and collaborate with peers, develop and coach others, oversee and guide the work of other colleagues to achieve meaningful outcomes and create business impact.


Have a strong engineering background and are interested in data
5+ years of experience with writing and debugging data pipelines using a distributed data framework (Hadoop/Spark/Pig etc…)
Have an inquisitive nature in diving into data inconsistencies to pinpoint issues
Strong coding skills in Scala, Python, Java or another language for building performance data pipelines.
Strong understanding and practical experience with systems such as Hadoop, Spark, Presto, Iceberg, and Airflow
The ability to communicate cross-functionally with solid stakeholder management to derive requirements and architect scalable solutions.


You have 3+ years of analytics engineering experience
You have built complex data transforms and pipelines as part of a cross-functional team
You have demonstrated ability to explore, transform, and analyze data using SQL. Must have experience using Looker.
You have experience with data orchestration tools
You communicate complex business concepts, technical requirements, recommendations and code clearly and concisely
You pay strong attention to detail


5+ years of experience in data/software engineering
Clear communication style
Collaborative, team playing, can-do attitude - our team works closely with many others and needs to build trust and understanding in order to succeed together with them
Strongly held, but politely expressed opinions about coding style, efficiency, and standards
Experience working with at least one cloud stack; we’re on Azure, but AWS, Google Cloud, etc. are just as valuable backgrounds to us
Experience working with some of the standard ETL technologies: we’re use SQL, Spark, etc. but if you’re a Hadoop wizard that’s cool too
Experience with DevOps setting up builds, deployment, environments management ala Git, Jenkins, TeamCity, DataBricks, JupyterHub, Kubernetes, Docker, Python environment management etc.
Experience collaborating with privacy and information security teams on sensitive data (be it customer data, legally protected data, law enforcement data, banking/financial data, etc)


5+ years of relevant professional experience
Strong experience with Spark
Experience with Hadoop (or similar) Ecosystem (MapReduce, Yarn, HDFS, Hive, Spark, Presto, Pig, HBase, Parquet)
Strong skills in a scripting language (Python, Ruby, Bash)
Good understanding of SQL Engine and able to conduct advanced performance tuning
Proficient in at least one of the SQL languages (MySQL, PostgreSQL, SqlServer, Oracle)
1+ years of experience with workflow management tools (Airflow, Oozie, Azkaban, UC4)
Comfortable working directly with data analytics to bridge Lyft’s business goals with data engineering


5+ years’ experience engineering and operationalizing data pipelines with large and complex datasets.
5+ years’ of hands on experience with Informatica PowerCenter.
5+ years’ experience with Data Modeling, ETL, and Data Warehousing.
2+ years’ of hands on experience with Informatica IICS.
3+ years’ experience working with Cloud technologies, such as ADLS, Azure Data Factory, Azure Databricks, Databricks Live Table, Spark, Azure Synapse, Cosmos DB, and other big data technologies.
Extensive experience working with various data sources (SQL,Oracle database, flat files (csv, delimited), Web API, XML.
Advanced SQL skills. Solid understanding of relational databases and business data; ability to write complex SQL queries against a variety of data sources.
Strong understanding of database storage concepts (data lake, relational databases, NoSQL, Graph, data warehousing).
Able to work in a fast-paced agile development environment.
Scheduling flexibility to meet the needs of the business including weekends, holidays, and 24/7 on call responsibilities on a rotational basis.


Experience in building data pipelines to serve reporting needs
Experience owning all or part of a team roadmap
Ability to prioritize requests from multiple stakeholders in disparate domains
Ability to effectively communicate complex projects to non-technical stakeholders


BS/BA degree in Computer Science, Math, Physics, or a related field, or equivalent years of experience in a relevant field
3+ year experience in SQL or similar languages
3+ years development experience in at least one object-oriented or scripting language (Python, Java, Scala, etc)


Hands on experience with Google BigQuery
Experience in version control systems such as Git
Data architecture and warehousing experience
Experience leading a small team of data or software engineers
Experience with Airflow
Experience in ETL / Data application development


3+ years of experience in a data engineering role building products, ideally in a fast-paced environment
Good foundations in Python, Java or Scala (Python being the one we use most)
Experience with Spark, PySpark, DBT, SQL, and Airflow
Knowledge of visualization tools, such as Metabase, Jupyter Notebooks (Python)
A knack for simplifying data, expressing information in charts and tables
Empathy: you are eager to see the world from your users’ perspectives
Energy: you're attracted to ambiguity & are a self-starter. You love to drive the direction of ambiguous projects
Motivation: our mission excites you. We are working to solve the biggest problems in mental health care today (access and affordability)


Proven ability to express complex technical concepts in business terms.
Exceptional team player with excellent interpersonal skills.
Possess excellent organizational skills with the ability to manage multiple responsibilities.
Comfortable working in a fast-paced, dynamic environment and committed to meeting deadlines.
Deep analytical, planning and problem-solving skills are required.
Excellent verbal and written communication skills.
Must be a self-starter, proactive and possess the ability to work with minimal supervision.


Bachelor’s degree in information model development and data warehousing or Computer Science or a degree to include similar major.
Fundamental data architecture and design skills
Excellent knowledge of SQL and strong data transformation skill.
Familiarity in developing and supporting the SAP HANA, Business Objects, and SAC platform stack to ensure performance, process, access is optimal for the global reporting solution.
2+ years of Experience in design and development of analytical queries, reports and visualizations utilizing the Tableau Platform.
2+ years of Experience with dbt or similar data orchestration tool. Experience working in CICD framework.
2+ years of Experience with Snowflake VWH and data modeling.
Familiarity with HVR replication or similar tools for data ingestion.
Experience with Python and Java programming.
Enjoy working with emerging technologies.
Comfortable with language barriers or constraints; bilingual language skills are a plus


Bachelor's Degree in Computer Science, Math, Software Engineering, Computer Engineering, or related field AND 4+ years experience in business analytics, data science, software development, data modeling or data engineering work
Architecting, building, and maintaining end-to-end, high-throughput data systems and their supporting services.
Designing efficient data structures and database schemas and working with distributed systems architecture
Incorporating data processing and workflow management tools into pipeline design.
Utilizing a variety of data stores, including data warehouses, relational database systems, in-memory caches, and searchable document databases.
Experience working with large data sets using SQL/Azure Data Lake/Spark, etc., to derive actionable insights is highly desirable.
Developing for continuous integration and automated deployments.
Using profiling tools, debugging logs, performance metrics, and other data sources to make code- and application-level improvements.


Above everything else, you are someone who drives impact, uses curiosity to do so and in the end, you’ve made both yourself and others better. We look for this in EVERY MasterClass hire.
Strong marketing analytics background and data manipulation experience along with a high proficiency in SQL
Fundamental understanding of data architecture, as well as familiarity with ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) workflows and processes
Expert knowledge with business intelligence tools (e.g. Looker) and web analytics and marketing tools (e.g. Amplitude, Segment, Iterable)
Expertise with statistical analyses, application, and concepts (e.g. regressions, experiment design, clustering etc.)
-
PERPLEXITY



SEGMENTS (PILLARS)
Can you provide the core pillars of "Marketing Analytics" from the perspective of a "Marketing Analytics Manager" role? Please be as detailed and structured as possible - you can utilize online references if needed.



As a Marketing Analytics Manager, the core pillars of Marketing Analytics can be structured into four key areas that form the foundation of data-driven marketing decision-making. These pillars are essential for leveraging data to drive business growth and optimize marketing strategies.
1. Data Collection and Integration
The first pillar focuses on gathering and unifying data from various sources:
Multiple Data Sources: Collect data from websites, CRM systems, social media platforms, ad networks, and third-party APIs3.
Data Integration: Unify data from disparate sources to create a comprehensive view of marketing performance3.
Data Quality: Ensure data accuracy, consistency, and completeness through proper data hygiene practices5.
Real-Time Data: Implement systems to collect and process data in real-time for timely insights6.
Data integration is the process of consolidating data from disparate sources into a unified system to enable comprehensive analysis and actionable insights. Here’s a structured breakdown of its key aspects, supported by real-world examples and industry applications:
Core Components of Data Integration
1. Data Source Discovery & Architecture
Audit & Aggregation: Conduct comprehensive audits to identify data silos (e.g., CRM systems, web analytics, social media) and design architectures (data lakes, warehouses) to unify them17.
Tools: Solutions like Hubspot and Marketo automated integrations for lead generation, email marketing, and cross-channel analytics213.
2. Data Transformation & Quality
ETL/ELT Processes: Extract, transform, and load data using tools like Improvado to cleanse, deduplicate, and standardize data for analysis36.
Compliance: Implement encryption, access controls, and GDPR/CCPA compliance to secure customer data117.
3. Unified Customer Profiles
Identity Resolution: Link customer identifiers across datasets (e.g., purchase history + web behavior) to build 360° profiles18.
Enrichment: Augment internal data with external sources (e.g., demographics, social trends) for deeper insights36.
2. Data Analysis and Insights Generation
The second pillar involves transforming raw data into actionable insights:
Statistical Analysis: Apply statistical methods to uncover patterns and trends in marketing data2.
Predictive Analytics: Utilize machine learning and statistical models to forecast customer behavior and market trends5.
Segmentation: Group customers based on shared characteristics to enable targeted marketing strategies5.
Performance Metrics: Develop and track key performance indicators (KPIs) aligned with business objectives6.
3. Visualization and Reporting
The third pillar focuses on presenting data in a clear and actionable format:
Dashboard Creation: Develop intuitive dashboards using tools like Tableau for real-time performance monitoring26.
Data Storytelling: Craft compelling narratives from data to influence decision-making15.
Custom Reporting: Generate tailored reports for different stakeholders across the organization2.
Visual Analytics: Use data visualization techniques to make complex information easily understandable2.
4. Strategic Implementation and Optimization
The final pillar involves applying insights to drive marketing strategy and continuous improvement:
Campaign Optimization: Use data-driven insights to refine and improve marketing campaigns2.
Customer Journey Mapping: Analyze data to understand and optimize the customer journey across touchpoints15.
ROI Analysis: Calculate and improve the return on investment for marketing initiatives2.
A/B Testing: Implement and analyze tests to optimize marketing elements and strategies5.
Cross-functional Collaboration: Work with various departments to implement data-driven strategies9.
-
GEMINI



SEGMENTS (PILLARS)
Can you provide the core pillars of "Marketing Analytics" from the perspective of a "Marketing Analytics Manager" role? Please be as detailed and structured as possible - you can utilize online references if needed.



I. Strategic Planning & Alignment
This pillar focuses on how Marketing Analytics aligns with broader business goals and how it contributes to the strategic planning process.
A. Understanding Business Objectives:
Detail: Deeply understanding the company's overarching goals (revenue growth, market share expansion, brand awareness, customer lifetime value, etc.) is paramount. This involves close collaboration with leadership across departments.
Action: Regularly participate in strategic planning sessions, conduct 1:1s with senior leaders to grasp their departmental goals, and translate those into measurable marketing objectives.
Outcome: Ensures marketing analytics efforts directly support and contribute to the company's strategic direction, providing meaningful insights that lead to actionable decisions.
B. Defining Marketing KPIs & Metrics:
Detail: Based on the business objectives, identify and define the Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) and supporting metrics that accurately reflect marketing performance and impact.
Action: Develop a comprehensive KPI framework aligned with the marketing funnel (awareness, consideration, acquisition, retention, advocacy). Choose metrics that are relevant, measurable, actionable, realistic, and time-bound (SMART).
Outcome: A clear measurement framework that allows for accurate tracking of marketing performance, identification of areas for optimization, and demonstration of marketing ROI.
C. Roadmap Development & Prioritization:
Detail: Create a roadmap that outlines key initiatives, projects, and analytical tasks to be undertaken by the marketing analytics team. Prioritize based on potential impact, resource availability, and alignment with business objectives.
Action: Use prioritization frameworks (e.g., impact vs. effort matrix, RICE scoring), collaborate with stakeholders to understand their needs, and continuously adapt the roadmap based on changing business priorities and insights generated.
Outcome: A well-defined plan that ensures the marketing analytics team is focused on the most valuable tasks, delivering insights that drive meaningful business outcomes.
D. Advocacy for Data-Driven Decision Making:
Detail: Champion a data-driven culture within the marketing department and the wider organization. Promote the value of analytics in making informed decisions and optimizing performance.
Action: Regularly share compelling data stories, present findings in a clear and concise manner, educate stakeholders on the power of analytics, and advocate for data-informed decision making at all levels.
Outcome: An organization that embraces data as a strategic asset, leveraging insights to make better decisions, improve efficiency, and drive growth.
II. Data Management & Infrastructure
This pillar focuses on the foundational elements of data collection, storage, integration, and quality assurance, ensuring the team has access to reliable and trustworthy data.
A. Data Collection & Tracking Implementation:
Detail: Ensure accurate and comprehensive tracking of all relevant marketing activities across various channels (website, social media, email, paid advertising, CRM, etc.).
Action: Work with development and IT teams to implement appropriate tracking tags (e.g., Google Tag Manager, UTM parameters), define data collection requirements for new campaigns, and ensure consistency in data capture across all platforms.
Outcome: A complete and accurate picture of marketing activities, providing a solid foundation for analysis and reporting.
B. Data Integration & Centralization:
Detail: Establish a central repository for marketing data, integrating data from various sources into a single, unified view.
Action: Implement and manage a data warehouse or data lake solution, use ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) processes to clean and integrate data, and build data pipelines to automate data flow.
Outcome: Eliminates data silos, provides a holistic view of customer interactions, and enables more sophisticated and comprehensive analysis.
C. Data Governance & Quality Assurance:


Detail: Implement processes and policies to ensure data accuracy, consistency, completeness, and compliance with privacy regulations (e.g., GDPR, CCPA).
Action: Define data quality standards, conduct regular data audits, implement data validation rules, and establish data governance policies that outline data ownership, access, and usage.
Outcome: High-quality, reliable data that can be trusted for analysis and decision making, while maintaining compliance with relevant regulations.
D. Technology Stack Management:
Detail: Select, implement, and manage the technology tools that underpin the marketing analytics function (e.g., web analytics platforms, marketing automation software, BI tools, data visualization tools).
Action: Evaluate and choose tools that meet the team's needs and budget, manage vendor relationships, ensure proper integration between tools, and stay updated on emerging technologies in the marketing analytics space.
Outcome: A well-integrated technology stack that empowers the team to efficiently collect, process, analyze, and visualize data.
III. Analysis, Reporting & Insights Generation
This is the core of the role, where data is transformed into actionable insights and communicated effectively to stakeholders.
A. Performance Reporting & Monitoring:
Detail: Develop and maintain regular reports and dashboards that track marketing performance against defined KPIs, providing a clear overview of campaign effectiveness and overall marketing impact.
Action: Build automated dashboards that provide real-time performance insights, create reports that highlight key trends and insights, and regularly share these with relevant stakeholders.
Outcome: Provides visibility into marketing performance, allowing for proactive identification of issues and opportunities for optimization.
B. Deep Dive Analysis & Investigation:
Detail: Conduct in-depth analysis to investigate specific performance trends, identify root causes of successes or failures, and uncover opportunities for improvement.
Action: Use statistical techniques and data exploration methods to identify patterns and anomalies in data, segment audiences to understand performance variations, and conduct A/B tests to validate hypotheses.
Outcome: Uncovers valuable insights that go beyond surface-level reporting, providing a deeper understanding of what's driving performance.
C. Predictive Modeling & Forecasting:
Detail: Leverage historical data to develop predictive models that forecast future performance, identify high-potential customers, and optimize marketing spend.
Action: Use machine learning algorithms to build predictive models for customer churn, lead scoring, campaign performance, and other key areas. Develop forecast models to predict future revenue and other business outcomes.
Outcome: Enables proactive decision making, allows for better resource allocation, and helps anticipate future trends.
D. Insight Communication & Storytelling:
Detail: Translate complex data findings into clear, concise, and compelling narratives that resonate with stakeholders and drive action.
Action: Use data visualization techniques to present insights in an engaging way, tell stories with data that connect with the audience, tailor communication to the specific needs of each stakeholder, and provide actionable recommendations based on the findings.
Outcome: Insights are effectively communicated and understood, leading to informed decisions and impactful actions.
IV. Team Leadership & Development
This pillar is about building a high-performing team and fostering a culture of continuous learning and improvement.
A. Team Building & Skill Development:
Detail: Recruit, train, and mentor a team of skilled marketing analysts with expertise in data analysis, statistical modeling, data visualization, and communication.
Action: Identify skill gaps within the team, provide opportunities for professional development, create a culture of continuous learning, and foster collaboration and knowledge sharing.
Outcome: A highly skilled and motivated team capable of delivering high-quality analysis and insights.
B. Process Optimization & Efficiency:
Detail: Continuously evaluate and improve team processes to enhance efficiency, productivity, and the quality of output.
Action: Automate repetitive tasks, streamline reporting processes, document workflows, and implement project management methodologies to ensure efficient execution.
Outcome: An efficient and productive team that can deliver insights in a timely and cost-effective manner.
C. Collaboration & Cross-Functional Alignment:
Detail: Foster strong relationships with other teams within the marketing department (e.g., digital marketing, content marketing, brand marketing) and across the organization (e.g., sales, product, IT).
Action: Establish clear communication channels, participate in cross-functional projects, share insights and findings, and work collaboratively to achieve common goals.
Outcome: Enhanced collaboration and alignment across teams, leading to more effective marketing strategies and a greater impact on business outcomes.
D. Staying Ahead of the Curve:
Detail: Maintain a forward-looking perspective, keeping abreast of industry trends, emerging technologies, and best practices in marketing analytics.
Action: Attend industry conferences, participate in online forums, read industry publications, and experiment with new tools and techniques.
Outcome: Ensures the team remains at the forefront of the field, leveraging the latest tools and methodologies to deliver cutting-edge insights.

-
OPENAI



SEGMENTS (PILLARS)
Can you provide the core pillars of "Marketing Analytics" from the perspective of a "Marketing Analytics Manager" role? Please be as detailed and structured as possible - you can utilize online references if needed.



1. Data Collection & Management
Data Source Identification
Definition: Identifying and cataloging all relevant data sources—this includes online channels (website, social media, email), offline channels (point of sale, call centers), third-party data providers, and customer relationship management (CRM) platforms.
Importance: Ensures a comprehensive view of the customer journey and marketing touchpoints.
Data Integration & Warehousing
Definition: Consolidating data into a single repository or data warehouse where it can be easily accessed and analyzed.
Key Considerations: ETL processes (Extract, Transform, Load), data schema design, data governance policies to maintain security and compliance.
Data Quality Assurance
Definition: Ongoing processes to cleanse, validate, and monitor data for accuracy, consistency, and completeness.
Impact: High data quality is foundational for credible analysis and insights.
2. Measurement & Attribution
Goal Setting & KPIs
Definition: Defining clear Key Performance Indicators that align with the organization’s marketing and overall business objectives (e.g., Customer Acquisition Cost, Lifetime Value, Conversion Rate).
Why It Matters: Helps track progress toward organizational goals and provides benchmarks for optimization.
Attribution Modeling
Definition: Methods to determine how different marketing touchpoints contribute to conversions or other desired outcomes.
Common Models: Last-click, first-click, linear, time decay, custom/data-driven models.
Challenges & Solutions: Multi-device and cross-channel tracking can complicate attribution; robust data collection, algorithms, and modeling are key to accurate analysis.
Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM)
Definition: A more macro-level view, analyzing the impact of marketing efforts (e.g., TV, digital, radio, print) on sales or brand metrics.
Manager’s Role: Overseeing statistical models and ensuring alignment with the brand’s strategic calendar, budget cycles, and campaign timelines.
3. Data Analysis & Insight Generation
Descriptive Analytics
Definition: Summarizing current and historical performance (e.g., dashboards showing campaign metrics, funnel analysis, cohort analysis).
Tools & Techniques: BI dashboards (Tableau, Power BI), basic SQL queries, pivot tables.
Diagnostic & Exploratory Analytics
Definition: Exploring data to find correlations, identify trends, and answer the “why” behind performance metrics.
Approaches: Root cause analysis, segmentation (e.g., RFM, demographic, behavioral), correlation analysis.
Predictive & Prescriptive Analytics
Definition: Using advanced statistical or machine learning models to forecast future outcomes or recommend optimal actions (e.g., churn prediction, next-best-offer modeling).
Manager’s Perspective: Overseeing cross-functional collaboration with data scientists or analysts, ensuring business context is embedded into the models, and validating model accuracy.
4. Reporting & Data Visualization
Dashboard Development
Definition: Creating real-time or scheduled dashboards to communicate performance metrics to stakeholders.
Best Practices: Keep dashboards simple, visually consistent, and aligned with the audience’s knowledge level.
Data Storytelling
Definition: Going beyond numbers to craft a narrative that explains insights, trends, and recommended actions.
Manager’s Role: Ensuring that insights are contextualized for decision-makers, avoiding data overload, and focusing on actionable takeaways.
Automated Reporting
Definition: Implementing scheduled email reports or triggering alerts for anomalies or significant changes in KPIs.
Value: Frees up time for deeper analysis by reducing manual reporting tasks.
5. Strategy & Stakeholder Management
Aligning Insights with Business Objectives
Definition: Translating analytics findings into strategic recommendations that resonate with marketing, finance, product teams, and senior leadership.
Example: Using data on customer segments to shape targeted campaigns or new product features.
Cross-Functional Collaboration
Definition: Working alongside other departments (e.g., Finance for budgeting, Product for feature usage data, Sales for CRM integration).
Manager’s Role: Ensuring that insights and data-driven recommendations inform not just marketing but any adjacent functions that can benefit from analytics.
Budgeting & Resource Allocation
Definition: Leveraging insights to decide how to allocate marketing spend across channels and tactics for maximum ROI.
Importance: Continuous improvement cycle—testing new channels, measuring outcomes, and reallocating based on performance.
6. Tools & Technology Stack
Analytics Platforms
Examples: Google Analytics (GA4), Adobe Analytics, Mixpanel, or enterprise BI systems.
Manager’s Responsibility: Selecting tools that fit the company’s scale and complexity, ensuring proper implementation (tagging, tracking codes, data architecture).
Marketing Automation & CRM
Examples: HubSpot, Marketo, Salesforce Marketing Cloud.
Value: Streamlines lead management, email campaigns, and personalization efforts, all of which feed back into the analytics ecosystem.
Data Management & Modeling Tools
Examples: SQL databases (PostgreSQL, MySQL), cloud data warehousing (Snowflake, BigQuery, Redshift), Python/R for modeling.
Manager’s Role: Overseeing the selection, integration, and efficient use of these platforms, often in collaboration with IT or Data Engineering teams.
7. Privacy & Compliance
Regulatory Frameworks
Examples: GDPR (Europe), CCPA (California), other data protection regulations worldwide.
Manager’s Role: Ensuring that data collection, storage, and usage practices meet compliance requirements, working closely with legal teams.
Ethical Data Usage
Definition: Balancing personalization and privacy, making transparent data policies for customers.
Importance: Builds customer trust and protects the brand’s reputation.
Security & Governance
Definition: Implementing secure access controls, encryption, and regular audits.
Value: Prevents data leaks, protects user information, and minimizes legal and financial risks.
8. Continuous Improvement & Experimentation
Testing Frameworks
Definition: Systematic approaches (A/B, multivariate testing) to validate hypotheses about marketing tactics (e.g., ad creative, landing page design).
Manager’s Role: Prioritizing test agendas, designing rigorous experiments, interpreting results accurately.
Iteration & Agile Marketing
Definition: Regularly revisiting analytics processes, KPIs, and campaign performance to refine strategies in real-time or near real-time.
Value: Encourages a culture of data-driven iteration, leading to incremental performance improvements and innovative marketing approaches.
Feedback Loops
Definition: Incorporating learnings from campaigns back into the planning and decision-making cycle.
Outcome: Ongoing optimization and better alignment with market changes and evolving consumer behavior.
KEY TERMS
What are the keywords, phrases, or job functions and skills that are most commonly referenced/associated with someone who does "marketing analytics"? Please provide an extensive list broken down by category.



1. Core Functional Areas & Responsibilities
Campaign Performance Analysis
Tracking effectiveness of digital and offline campaigns
Identifying areas for improvement in funnel metrics
Budget & ROI Optimization
Analyzing return on ad spend (ROAS)
Allocating marketing resources effectively
Customer Insights & Segmentation
Developing and analyzing customer segmentation models (RFM, demographic, behavioral)
Identifying target audiences and personalization opportunities
Attribution & Reporting
Building and maintaining attribution models (first-touch, last-touch, multi-touch, data-driven)
Creating dashboards and executive reports
Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM)
Statistical modeling to determine impact of various marketing channels on sales/brand KPIs
A/B Testing & Experimentation
Designing and executing controlled experiments
Interpreting test results to drive data-driven decisions
2. Technical & Analytical Skills
Data Analysis & Statistics
Proficiency in statistical techniques (regression, hypothesis testing, ANOVA)
Familiarity with Bayesian methods or machine learning concepts
Data Management & SQL
Writing SQL queries for data extraction and manipulation
Database concepts (relational databases, data modeling)
Statistical Programming & Languages
Python (NumPy, pandas, scikit-learn) or R (dplyr, ggplot2, caret)
SAS or SPSS (less common but still relevant in some large enterprises)
Business Intelligence & Visualization Tools
Tableau, Power BI, Looker, QlikView, or equivalent
Data storytelling and dashboard design best practices
Data Warehousing & ETL Tools
Familiarity with cloud data warehouses (Snowflake, BigQuery, Redshift)
Experience with data pipelines and workflow orchestration (Airflow, dbt)
3. Marketing Domain Knowledge
Digital Marketing Channels
Search Engine Marketing (SEM), Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
Social Media Advertising (Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn Ads)
Display, Programmatic, Video advertising
Web & App Analytics
Google Analytics (GA4), Adobe Analytics, Mixpanel, Amplitude
Understanding user journeys and event tracking
CRM & Email Marketing
Tools like Salesforce, Marketo, HubSpot
Lead scoring, lifecycle marketing, nurturing campaigns
E-commerce & Retail Metrics
Conversion rate optimization (CRO)
Basket analysis, average order value (AOV), cart abandonment
Offline/Traditional Media
TV, radio, print
Measuring impact on brand metrics and correlating with sales lift
Key Methodologies & Frameworks
Customer Lifetime Value (LTV) Analysis
Calculating how much revenue a customer generates over their entire relationship with the business
Used for acquisition budget decisions, retention strategies
Attribution Modeling
Last-click, first-click, linear, time decay, or custom/data-driven models
Determining the true impact of each touchpoint
Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM)
Applying regression or other statistical methods to understand incremental impact of channels
Budget allocation and channel optimization
Predictive Analytics
Churn prediction, propensity modeling, next-best-action
Leveraging advanced ML or AI algorithms
A/B Testing & Multivariate Testing
Common frameworks: Designing tests, randomization, significance testing
Tools: Google Optimize, Optimizely, VWO, Adobe Target
Soft Skills & Cross-Functional Collaboration
Communication & Data Storytelling
Translating complex analytical findings into simple, actionable insights
Presenting to stakeholders of varying technical backgrounds
Stakeholder Management
Collaborating with marketing teams, product managers, sales, finance, and senior leadership
Understanding business goals and ensuring alignment with analytics projects
Project Management
Managing analytics initiatives from ideation to delivery
Applying agile or waterfall approaches for timely execution
Critical Thinking & Problem-Solving
Identifying root causes of performance issues
Proposing data-driven solutions and testing them
Adaptability & Continuous Learning
Staying current with evolving marketing technologies and data privacy regulations
Eagerness to adopt new analytical methods or tools
Common Tools & Technologies
Web Analytics Platforms
Google Analytics (GA4), Adobe Analytics, Mixpanel, Amplitude
Tag Management & Tracking
Google Tag Manager (GTM), Adobe Launch, Tealium
CRM & Marketing Automation
Salesforce Marketing Cloud, Marketo, HubSpot
BI & Reporting Tools
Tableau, Power BI, Looker, Qlik
Databases & Data Warehouses
SQL databases (MySQL, PostgreSQL), NoSQL (MongoDB)
Cloud platforms (Snowflake, BigQuery, Redshift)
Advanced Analytics Tools
Python, R, SAS, SPSS
ML frameworks (TensorFlow, PyTorch) – less common in smaller teams but present in advanced data science roles
Keywords & Phrases Frequently Associated with Marketing Analytics
ROI (Return on Investment)
ROAS (Return on Ad Spend)
CPA (Cost Per Acquisition)
CLV or LTV (Customer Lifetime Value)
CAC (Customer Acquisition Cost)
Funnel Analysis (TOFU, MOFU, BOFU)
Attribution Model
Predictive Modeling
Forecasting & Trend Analysis
Dashboards & Reporting
Data-Driven Decision Making
KPI Frameworks
Big Data & Advanced Analytics
Customer Segmentation
Cohort Analysis
Cross-Channel / Omnichannel Analytics
Statistical Significance
Regression Analysis
Machine Learning (Supervised, Unsupervised)
Test & Learn Approach
Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM)
Brand Equity & Brand Tracking
Lift Analysis
Incrementality Testing
-

CLAUDE



Data & Decision Science
Can you provide a detailed overview of what a Decision Scientist does including any techniques, skills, methodologies, etc. that are typically utilized on the job?



Core Function
A Decision Scientist combines data science, business strategy, and behavioral economics to help organizations make better decisions.
They are usually operations researchers that use optimization techniques to make decisions. This can be used in conjunction with a predictive model, so you can tune the input parameters to optimize a business outcome.
Key Methodologies & Techniques
Mathematics
Statistics
Experimentation
Management
Psychology
Computer Science


Mathematics
Mathematics provides the foundation for quantitative techniques like linear programming, optimization, and statistical analysis. Mathematics tools help model and solve complex problems. 
Linear Programming
Budget allocation across marketing channels with constraints.
Relevant Experience
		Employment
Credit Sesame managing $1.5M monthly budget; using optimization to determine:
Adobe managing $12M budget while maintaining optimal CAC of $18
	Objectives
Maximum ROAS given minimum spend requirements per channel
Optimal split between digital and traditional media
Resource allocation across product campaigns
		Utilization & Deployment
Media Mix Optimization
Objective
Maximize Total ROAS
Conversion Optimization
Constraints
Spend Caps
Capacity (Channel)
Target Customer Ceiling
	
Optimization Models
Bidding strategies for paid search campaigns
Email send time optimization
Content distribution scheduling


A. 







Example from your experience:

At likely involved:

Objective Function: Maximize conversions
Constraints:

Channel budgets
CAC targets
Minimum reach requirements





B. Multi-objective Optimization

Techniques:

Goal Programming
Pareto Optimization
Constraint Programming



Applied to:

Balancing multiple KPIs:

Revenue growth
Cost efficiency
Brand awareness
Customer acquisition
Similar to your work at Credit Sesame optimizing "user acquisition cost from $18 to $9 while growing baseline users"




Advanced Mathematical Methods

A. Calculus-Based Optimization

Marginal Analysis:

Finding optimal spend levels where marginal return equals marginal cost
Determining diminishing returns thresholds


Gradient Descent:

Optimizing bidding strategies
Fine-tuning targeting parameters



B. Time Series Mathematics

Techniques:

Fourier Analysis for seasonal patterns
Exponential Smoothing
ARIMA Models
Used in your "time series analysis" experience



Applied to:

Forecasting:

Campaign performance
Seasonal demand
Budget pacing
Similar to how you "exceeded forecasts by 30%" at Adobe




Probability & Stochastic Processes

A. Markov Chain Models

Applications:

Customer journey mapping
Attribution modeling
Next-best-action prediction


Related to your experience in "developing advanced attribution modeling systems"

B. Bayesian Optimization

Used for:

A/B test sample size determination
Dynamic budget allocation
Real-time bid optimization
Similar to your "multivariate testing frameworks"




Network & Graph Theory

A. Network Flow Optimization

Applications:

Multi-channel attribution
Customer journey optimization
Content distribution


Aligns with your experience in "marketing mix optimization frameworks"


Game Theory Applications

A. Competitive Analysis

Nash Equilibrium in:

Bid strategies
Pricing optimization
Market share analysis


Related to your "competitive analysis" experience

B. Auction Theory

Applications:

Programmatic advertising
Search engine marketing
Social media advertising






Statistics
Statistics Involves collecting, analyzing, interpreting, and presenting data. Statistical techniques, like hypothesis testing and regression analysis, enable informed judgments based on empirical evidence.
Hypothesis Testing
A/B testing email subject lines
Landing page conversion optimization
Testing ad creative variations
Similar to your "multivariate testing framework" at Adobe
Regression Analysis
Forecasting seasonal demand
Predicting customer lifetime value
Understanding factors driving conversion rates
Like your work that "generated $800M in incremental revenue exceeding forecasts"

Management
Decision sciences draw from management principles to understand organizational structures, processes, and goals. Decision scientists collaborate with managers to identify problems, develop strategies, and implement solutions.
Psychology
Decision sciences incorporate principles from psychology to understand human behavior and decision-making processes. Behavioral decision theory explores cognitive biases, heuristics, and preferences that impact decisions
Computer Science
Decision sciences use computational methods and algorithms to process, analyze, and interpret large datasets. Machine learning algorithms and data mining techniques help to extract meaningful insights from data.


Management
Based on your experience "leading cross-functional initiatives":
Problem Identification:
Cross-channel attribution challenges
Customer journey mapping
Campaign performance optimization needs
Strategy Development:
Marketing mix modeling
Channel strategy optimization
Similar to how you "reduced paid media dependency by 35%" at Adobe

Psychology
Relating to your experience with "customer behavior analysis":
Behavioral Decision Theory:
Understanding purchase decision factors
Analyzing abandonment behavior
Customer segment preference mapping
Like your work in "user segmentation cohorts testing" at Credit Sesame
Cognitive Bias Analysis:
Impact of pricing presentation
Effect of social proof in marketing
Influence of urgency messaging

Computer Science
Drawing from your technical skills:
Machine Learning Applications:
Customer propensity modeling
Churn prediction
Next best action recommendations
Similar to your experience with "predictive analytics”
Data Mining:
Customer segmentation
Pattern recognition in browsing behavior
Campaign performance analysis
Like your work "identifying high-converting customer segments"


Decision Science Frameworks & Utilities
Customer Segmentation and Personalization
Aydinli, a large brand distributor, partnered with Acquia to implement machine learning models for customer segmentation. The models identified behavioral- and product-based clusters, allowing Aydinli to segment customers into categories such as high-returners and digital-only buyers. This resulted in an additional $50,000 per campaign and a ROI of over 3,500%.
	
	Predictive Segmentation
This technique uses advanced analytics to forecast which segments are likely to convert, churn, or require specific marketing actions. For example, predictive models can identify customers at risk of churning and target them with personalized retention offers.
Recommendation Systems
A multinational e-commerce company worked with Itransition to develop an AI- and computer vision-powered recommendation engine. Using collaborative filtering algorithms, the system analyzes large sets of customer data to predict products a given customer is most likely to be interested in. This implementation led to an 8% increase in visitors-to-buyers conversion rate.



Core Components of Decision Science
Descriptive Models
These models explain how decisions are made based on historical data. For example, Amazon analyzes past purchasing behavior to recommend products to users based on what similar customers bought.
Prescriptive Models
These models provide actionable recommendations based on data analysis. Netflix uses prescriptive analytics to suggest movies and shows to users based on their viewing history, optimizing user engagement and retention.
Normative Models
These models establish the ideal decision-making processes under given constraints. For instance, a financial firm might use normative models to suggest diversified investment strategies tailored to clients’ risk profiles.
Behavioral Insights
This component examines how psychological factors influence decision-making. For example, companies like Google study user behavior to design interfaces that minimize cognitive load and enhance user experience, recognizing that simpler choices often lead to better user satisfaction.
Decision Frameworks
These are structured approaches to decision-making that guide individuals and organizations through complex choices. For instance, organizations may use the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) to prioritize projects by evaluating multiple criteria systematically.

Most Popular Statistical Models (Top 20)
Linear Regression
Linear regression is a widely used statistical model that predicts the relationship between a dependent variable and one or more independent variables. It assumes a linear relationship between the variables and is often used for forecasting and estimating future trends.
Logistic Regression
Logistic regression is a binary classification model that predicts the probability of an event occurring or not. It is widely used in healthcare, finance, and marketing to predict outcomes such as whether a patient will develop a disease or whether a customer will buy a product.
Decision Trees: Decision trees are a visual representation of a set of rules that lead to a decision. They are often used in machine learning and data mining to predict outcomes and classify data.
Random Forest: A random forest is an ensemble learning technique that uses multiple decision trees to make predictions. It is often used in data mining and machine learning for classification and regression tasks.
Support Vector Machines: Support vector machines are a popular supervised learning technique used for classification and regression tasks. They work by identifying a hyperplane that separates the data into different classes.
Naive Bayes: Naive Bayes is a probabilistic model that calculates the likelihood of an event based on prior knowledge. It is widely used in natural language processing and text classification.
K-Nearest Neighbors: K-Nearest Neighbors is a non-parametric classification model that predicts the class of a new data point based on the classes of its k nearest neighbors. It is widely used in pattern recognition and data mining.
Principal Component Analysis: Principal Component Analysis is a dimensionality reduction technique that reduces the dimensionality of a dataset while retaining the most important features. It is widely used in data visualization and feature selection.
Clustering: Clustering is an unsupervised learning technique that groups similar data points together. It is widely used in data mining, customer segmentation, and image processing.
Neural Networks: Neural networks are a set of algorithms modeled on the human brain that can learn and recognize patterns. They are widely used in image and speech recognition, natural language processing, and robotics.
Markov Chains: Markov chains are a stochastic model that describes a sequence of events where the probability of each event depends only on the state of the previous event. They are widely used in finance, speech recognition, and genetics.
Time Series Analysis: Time series analysis is a statistical technique used to analyze time series data to identify patterns and make forecasts. It is widely used in finance, economics, and engineering.

ARIMA
ARIMA stands for AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average and is a popular time series model used for forecasting. It combines autoregressive and moving average components to make predictions. The three components of ARIMA are:
AR (Autoregressive): This component uses past values of the time series to predict future values.
I (Integrated): This component removes non-stationarity from the time series by differencing the data.
MA (Moving Average): This component uses past errors to predict future values.
ARIMA models are powerful for time series forecasting, but no model is perfect. The choice of parameters and the presence of outliers can affect the model’s performance.

GARCH: GARCH stands for Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity and is a statistical model used to predict volatility in financial markets. It is widely used in finance and economics.
Cox Proportional Hazards: Cox Proportional Hazards is a survival analysis model used to predict the probability of an event occurring over time. It is widely used in healthcare, finance, and actuarial science.
Poisson Regression: Poisson regression is a statistical model used to predict the number of times an event occurs in a given time period, based on one or more predictor variables. It is a generalized linear model that assumes the response variable follows a Poisson distribution. The Poisson distribution is a discrete probability distribution that models the number of occurrences of a rare event over a fixed interval of time or space.
ANOVA: ANOVA stands for Analysis of Variance and is a statistical model used to compare the means of two or more groups. It is widely used in experimental design and research.
MANOVA: MANOVA stands for Multivariate Analysis of Variance and is a statistical model used to compare the means of multiple dependent variables across two or more groups. It is widely used in social sciences and psychology.
Multilevel Modeling: Multilevel modeling is a statistical model used to analyze hierarchical data, where the data is organized into groups or clusters. It is widely used in education, social sciences, and healthcare.
Structural Equation Modeling: Structural Equation Modeling is a statistical model used to test and estimate complex relationships between multiple variables. It is widely used in psychology, social sciences, and marketing research.


Data Analysis Models
Descriptive analysis
Exploratory analysis
Inferential analysis
Prescriptive analysis
Predictive analysis
Causal analysis


How Statistical Models Work
Statistical Models use observed data to estimate relationships between different variables. A model begins with a set of assumptions about the data, which are then expressed as mathematical equations. 

The model is trained on historical data to estimate the parameters best describing these relationships. Once built, the model can be used to make predictions about new data or evaluate the significance of certain factors.

For example, a simple linear regression model assumes a straight-line relationship between two variables. Based on the data, the model calculates the line’s slope and intercept, which can then be used to predict the outcome of a dependent variable given new input.

Key Objectives of Statistical Modeling

Prediction: One of the primary goals of Statistical Modeling is to predict future outcomes based on historical data. This is especially useful in finance and weather forecasting, where predictions guide decision-making.
Hypothesis Testing: Statistical Models help test hypotheses by analysing relationships between variables. Researchers use models to determine whether a certain factor significantly affects an outcome or if the result occurred by chance.
Understanding Relationships: Statistical Modeling helps in understanding the relationships between variables. For instance, it can identify the impact of multiple factors on a single outcome, allowing businesses to optimise processes or improve product development.

Key Components of Statistical Models
Statistical Models are essential tools in Data Analysis, helping to identify patterns and make predictions. To understand how these models work, it’s important to recognise their key components. Each component is vital in determining the model’s accuracy and effectiveness. Below are the main components of Statistical Models:

Variables
Statistical Models rely on two types of variables—dependent and independent. The dependent variable is the outcome you’re trying to predict or explain, while the independent variables (also known as predictors) influence the dependent variable. Identifying the right variables is crucial for accurate modeling.

Parameters
These are the values that the model estimates to explain the relationship between independent and dependent variables. Parameters help quantify the effect of each independent variable on the dependent variable. For example, in linear regression, parameters are the coefficients that multiply the independent variables.

Model Structure
This defines how the variables and parameters are arranged. Models can be linear (where relationships between variables are straight-line) or nonlinear (where relationships curve or vary in complex ways). The structure choice depends on the nature of the data and the relationship you’re modeling.

Error Term
No model is perfect, and the error term accounts for the difference between the model’s predictions and actual outcomes. It represents variability that the model doesn’t explain.

Understanding these components is fundamental to building reliable Statistical Models that provide valuable insights into data.

---

Types of Statistical Models
Types of Statistical Models
Statistical Models come in various types, each serving a distinct purpose in analysing data and drawing insights. Understanding these types helps in selecting the right approach to solve specific problems. Below are the four main types of Statistical Models: descriptive, predictive, prescriptive, and inferential models.

Descriptive Models
Descriptive models summarise and describe a dataset’s main features. They focus on identifying patterns, relationships, and trends within the data without making predictions or suggesting decisions. These models help understand historical data and form a foundation for deeper analysis. For example, descriptive models commonly use frequency distributions and summary statistics (mean, median, mode).

Predictive Models
Predictive models are designed to forecast future outcomes based on historical data. They identify patterns in existing data and use them to predict unknown events. Predictive modeling is widely used in finance, healthcare, and marketing. 

Techniques like linear regression, time series analysis, and decision trees are examples of predictive models. These models enable businesses to anticipate customer behaviour, forecast sales, or predict risks.

Prescriptive Models
Prescriptive models go further than predictive models by recommending specific actions based on the predictions. They help decision-making by suggesting the best course of action to achieve desired outcomes. 

Optimisation models and simulation techniques are often used in prescriptive modeling. A common application is supply chain management, where prescriptive models recommend inventory levels based on predicted demand.

Inferential Models
Inferential models are used to make generalisations or inferences about a population based on a sample of data. These models help in hypothesis testing and determining the relationships between variables. Bayesian models and hypothesis tests (like t-tests or chi-square tests) are examples of inferential models. They are essential in scientific research for concluding limited data.

Each type of Statistical Model plays a unique role, providing valuable insights for decision-making and problem-solving.

Common Statistical Modeling Techniques
Common Statistical Modeling Techniques
Statistical Modeling techniques are essential for analysing data, identifying patterns, and making predictions. These techniques vary in complexity and are applied based on the nature of the data and the problem at hand. Below are some of the most commonly used Statistical Modeling techniques and an overview of their applications.

Linear Regression
Linear regression is one of the simplest and most widely used statistical techniques. It models the relationship between a dependent variable and one or more independent variables by fitting a linear equation to the observed data. The goal is to predict the dependent variable based on the values of the independent variables.

Applications:

Forecasting sales or revenue trends
Estimating the impact of marketing campaigns
Predicting housing prices based on features such as location, size, and amenities
Logistic Regression
Unlike linear regression, logistic regression is used when the dependent variable is categorical. It estimates the probability that a given input falls into two categories. The model uses a logistic function to map predicted values to probabilities between 0 and 1.

Applications:

Binary classification tasks, such as spam detection
Predicting customer churn in subscription-based businesses
Medical diagnosis, such as determining whether a patient has a disease (yes/no)
Time Series Models
Time series models analyse data points collected or observed at successive points in time. They capture trends, seasonal patterns, and cyclical behaviour in time-dependent data. The most commonly used time series techniques include ARIMA (AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average) and exponential smoothing.

Applications:

Stock price prediction and financial forecasting
Analysing sales trends over time
Demand forecasting in supply chain management
Clustering Models
Clustering is an unsupervised learning technique used to group similar data points together. These models do not rely on predefined labels; instead, they discover the inherent structure in the data by identifying clusters based on similarities. Popular clustering algorithms include k-means and hierarchical clustering.

Applications:

Customer segmentation in marketing
Identifying patterns in image recognition tasks
Grouping similar documents or news articles for topic discovery
Decision Trees
Decision trees are non-parametric models that partition the data into subsets based on specific criteria. At each node in the tree, the data is split based on the value of an input variable, and the process is repeated recursively until a decision is made. 

This technique is easy to interpret and visualise, making it a popular choice for classification and regression tasks.

Applications:

Credit risk analysis for loan approval
Predicting patient outcomes in healthcare
Fraud detection in financial transactions

---

Steps in Building a Statistical Model
Building a Statistical Model involves structured steps to transform raw data into meaningful insights. Each phase ensures the model’s accuracy, reliability, and predictive power. 

By following a systematic approach, you can optimise the performance of your Statistical Model and ensure it meets the needs of the problem you’re solving. Below are the essential steps involved in the process.

Data Collection and Preparation
The first and most critical step in building a Statistical Model is gathering and preparing the data. Quality data is essential, as poor or incomplete data can lead to inaccurate models. Start by collecting data relevant to your problem, ensuring it’s diverse and representative. 

After collecting the data, focus on data cleaning, which includes handling missing values, correcting errors, and ensuring consistency.

Data preparation also involves feature engineering. This step allows you to transform raw variables into meaningful features that will help improve the model’s performance. Data normalisation and standardisation ensure variables are on the same scale, especially in models sensitive to variable magnitudes.

Model Selection
After preparing the data, the next step is selecting the right Statistical Model. The choice of model depends on the nature of the data and the problem you’re solving. 

For instance, linear regression models work well for continuous outcomes, while logistic regression is ideal for binary classification problems. In more complex cases, you may need to explore non-linear models like decision trees, support vector machines, or time series models.

Model selection requires balancing simplicity and performance. While more complex models may offer higher accuracy, they can be harder to interpret and prone to overfitting.

Model Training
Once the model is selected, you train it using the dataset. During training, the model learns from the input data by identifying patterns and relationships between the independent and dependent variables. 

Model training involves optimising parameters to minimise errors and improve prediction accuracy. Splitting your data into training and test sets is essential to ensure the model doesn’t memorise the data but instead learns generalisable patterns.

Model Validation
Model validation is a critical step to evaluate the model’s performance on unseen data. You should use techniques like cross-validation, where the data is divided into subsets, and the model is trained and validated on different splits. 

This helps ensure that the model performs well across different data samples and is not overfitted to the training data.

Interpretation of Results
Once the model is trained and validated, it’s time to interpret the results. Examine the model’s output to understand the relationships between variables and whether the predictions align with the problem’s objectives. 

Interpretation helps in explaining the model to stakeholders, allowing for actionable decisions based on the insights gained. Pay attention to key metrics like accuracy, precision, recall, and R-squared values to assess the model’s effectiveness.

Iterative Nature of Model Building and Tuning
Building a Statistical Model is rarely a one-time task. The process is iterative, requiring continuous fine-tuning to improve performance. After evaluating the model’s results, you may need to return to earlier stages to adjust parameters, try different models, or modify the data. 

This iterative approach helps in refining the model until it achieves the desired accuracy and reliability for real-world applications.

By understanding these steps, you can develop robust Statistical Models that provide valuable insights and drive informed decision-making.

---

Challenges in Statistical Modeling
Statistical Modeling is a powerful tool for Data Analysis, but several challenges can impact the accuracy and reliability of the results. Overcoming these issues is critical to building robust models that offer meaningful insights.

Overfitting vs. Underfitting: Overfitting happens when a model fits the training data too closely, while underfitting occurs when it fails to capture key patterns.
Multicollinearity: Highly correlated variables can distort model outcomes.
Data Quality: Incomplete or inaccurate data can lead to unreliable results.
Model Interpretability: Complex models can be difficult to explain and understand.



Uses of Statistical Modeling
1. Spatial Models

Spatial dependency is the co-variation of properties within geographic space: characteristics at proximal locations appear to be correlated, either positively or negatively. Spatial dependency leads to the spatial auto-correlation problem in statistics since, like temporal auto-correlation, this violates standard statistical techniques that assume independence among observations

2. Time Series

Methods for time series analyses may be divided into two classes: frequency-domain methods and time-domain methods. The former include spectral analysis and recently wavelet analysis; the latter include auto-correlation and cross-correlation analysis. In time domain, correlation analyses can be made in a filter-like manner using scaled correlation, thereby mitigating the need to operate in frequency domain.

Additionally, time series analysis techniques may be divided into parametric and non-parametric methods. The parametric approaches assume that the underlying stationary stochastic process has a certain structure which can be described using a small number of parameters (for example, using an autoregressive or moving average model). In these approaches, the task is to estimate the parameters of the model that describes the stochastic process. By contrast, non-parametric approaches explicitly estimate the covariance or the spectrum of the process without assuming that the process has any particular structure.

Methods of time series analysis may also be divided into linear and non-linear, and univariate and multivariate.

3. Survival Analysis

Survival analysis is a branch of statistics for analyzing the expected duration of time until one or more events happen, such as death in biological organisms and failure in mechanical systems. This topic is called reliability theory or reliability analysis in engineering, duration analysis or duration modelling in economics, and event history analysis in sociology. Survival analysis attempts to answer questions such as: what is the proportion of a population which will survive past a certain time? Of those that survive, at what rate will they die or fail? Can multiple causes of death or failure be taken into account? How do particular circumstances or characteristics increase or decrease the probability of survival? Survival models are used by actuaries and statisticians, but also by marketers designing churn and user retention models.

Survival models are also used to predict time-to-event (time from becoming radicalized to turning into a terrorist, or time between when a gun is purchased and when it is used in a murder), or to model and predict decay (see section 4 in this article).

4. Market Segmentation

Market segmentation, also called customer profiling, is a marketing strategy which involves dividing a broad target market into subsets of consumers,businesses, or countries that have, or are perceived to have, common needs, interests, and priorities, and then designing and implementing strategies to target them. Market segmentation strategies are generally used to identify and further define the target customers, and provide supporting data for marketing plan elements such as positioning to achieve certain marketing plan objectives. Businesses may develop product differentiation strategies, or an undifferentiated approach, involving specific products or product lines depending on the specific demand and attributes of the target segment.

5. Recommendation Systems

Recommender systems or recommendation systems (sometimes replacing “system” with a synonym such as platform or engine) are a subclass of information filtering system that seek to predict the ‘rating’ or ‘preference’ that a user would give to an item.

6. Association Rule Learning

Association rule learning is a method for discovering interesting relations between variables in large databases. For example, the rule { onions, potatoes } ==> { burger }  found in the sales data of a supermarket would indicate that if a customer buys onions and potatoes together, they are likely to also buy hamburger meat. In fraud detection, association rules are used to detect patterns associated with fraud. Linkage analysis is performed to identify additional fraud cases: if credit card transaction from user A was used to make a fraudulent purchase at store B, by analyzing all transactions from store B, we might find another user C with fraudulent activity. 

7. Attribution Modeling

An attribution model is the rule, or set of rules, that determines how credit for sales and conversions is assigned to touchpoints in conversion paths. For example, the Last Interaction model in Google Analytics assigns 100% credit to the final touchpoints (i.e., clicks) that immediately precede sales or conversions. Macro-economic models use long-term, aggregated historical data to assign, for each sale or conversion, an attribution weight to a number of channels. These models are also used for advertising mix optimization.

8. Scoring

Scoring model is a special kind of predictive models. Predictive models can predict defaulting on loan payments, risk of accident, client churn or attrition, or chance of buying a good. Scoring models typically use a logarithmic scale (each additional 50 points in your score reducing the risk of defaulting by 50%), and are based on logistic regression and decision trees, or a combination of multiple algorithms. Scoring technology is typically applied to transactional data, sometimes in real time (credit card fraud detection, click fraud).

9. Predictive Modeling

Predictive modeling leverages statistics to predict outcomes. Most often the event one wants to predict is in the future, but predictive modelling can be applied to any type of unknown event, regardless of when it occurred. For example, predictive models are often used to detect crimes and identify suspects, after the crime has taken place. They may also used for weather forecasting, to predict stock market prices, or to predict sales, incorporating time series or spatial models. Neural networks, linear regression, decision trees and naive Bayes are some of the techniques used for predictive modeling. They are associated with creating a training set, cross-validation, and model fitting and selection.

Some predictive systems do not use statistical models, but are data-driven instead. See example here. 

10. Clustering

Cluster analysis or clustering is the task of grouping a set of objects in such a way that objects in the same group (called a cluster) are more similar (in some sense or another) to each other than to those in other groups (clusters). It is a main task of exploratory data mining, and a common technique for statistical data analysis, used in many fields, including machine learning, pattern recognition, image analysis, information retrieval, and bioinformatics.

Unlike supervised classification (below), clustering does not use training sets. Though there are some hybrid implementations, called semi-supervised learning.

11. Supervised Classification

Supervised classification, also called supervised learning, is the machine learning task of inferring a function from labeled training data. The training data consist of a set of training examples. In supervised learning, each example is a pair consisting of an input object (typically a vector) and a desired output value (also called label, class or category). A supervised learning algorithm analyzes the training data and produces an inferred function, which can be used for mapping new examples. An optimal scenario will allow for the algorithm to correctly determine the class labels for unseen instances. 

Examples, with an emphasis on big data, can be found on DSC. Clustering algorithms are notoriously slow, though a very fast technique known as indexation or automated tagging will be described in Part II of this article.

12. Extreme Value Theory

Extreme value theory or extreme value analysis (EVA) is a branch of statistics dealing with the extreme deviations from the median of probability distributions. It seeks to assess, from a given ordered sample of a given random variable, the probability of events that are more extreme than any previously observed. For instance, floods that occur once every 10, 100, or 500 years. These models have been performing poorly recently, to predict catastrophic events, resulting in massive losses for insurance companies. I prefer Monte-Carlo simulations, especially if your training data is very large. This will be described in Part II of this article.



-
Bridging Data and Marketing Strategy, Driving Business Impact
Strategic thinker who can leverage advanced analytics to optimize marketing efforts and guide the team accordingly
Technical & Analytical Skills



Statistical Modeling, Attribution, Forecasting, & Customer Segmentation
Describe your experience with statistical modeling techniques relevant to marketing, such as attribution modeling, forecasting, or customer segmentation.  Can you give an example of how you've applied one of these in a previous role?



WHERE
@Adobe
SITUATION
Limited visibility, actionable insights, and validation for marketing spend decisions
Channel value and impact in marketing funnel
Establish foundation for MMM optimization
Spend efficiency and value analysis for spend allocation for conversions
TASK
TECHNICALS
Tooling: Data Warehouse, Segment (Adobe Experience Platform), Amplitude
Tracking: Build ID (BID) w/ Display Ads → Cookie + Pixel + IP +/- Email; Unified ID
Phase 1: 2021
@Q3
Integration: Optimize Multi-Touch Attribution
Issue: Lack of tracking breadth (ex. User ID Unification)
@Q4
Observation: Marketing investment impact, relationship, effects
Statistical Models: Logistic regression (probability of conversion given the presence or absence of different marketing touchpoints in a customer's journey) + markov chain (focus on the transitions between different touchpoints)
Analysis
Business Impact: Convert users to paid subscribers for Creative Cloud
Channels: Search ads, display ads, social media marketing (Facebook ads), email campaigns, SEO, TV Ads (Lift)
Actionable Insights:
Channel Funnels
Display ads key first engagement points for content awareness (resource downloads, tutorials, etc.)
Content Marketing (SEO) was vital for the cohort in reviews and comparisons (consideration)
Search Ads (Google) was a path for the cohort to explore use case landing pages (consideration)
Email Campaigns (Lifecycle) provided a nurturing pipeline to final conversion to paid subscriber (conversion)
Customer Segments (Cohorts)
Hobbyist & Amateur Creatives
Optimizing for this specific cohort as it yielded the highest net growth opportunity in terms of current market share gap
ACTION
Phase 2: 2022
@Q1
Implementation: Optimizing Channels Budgeting
Email Marketing: Increase investment in email marketing, focusing on personalized and targeted campaigns
Search Marketing (Google Ads): Optimize search campaigns to target high-intent keywords and improve landing page experience
Display Ads: Refine display ad targeting and creative to drive more qualified traffic to the website
RESULTS
@Baselines
Subscriptions (Monthly Net): 50,000
Marketing Budget Allocation (CC)
Email: 20%
Search: 30%
Display: 30%
Social: 20%
CR (avg. wt): 2%
LTV (avg. wt): $500

@Actionable Insights & Implementation
Email Marketing budget from 20% to 30%
More personalized email sequences based on user behavior and product interest
Improved email segmentation, targeting specific user groups (e.g., students, professional photographers, video editors).
A/B testing subject lines, content, and calls-to-action to optimize engagement
Display Ad Targeting budget kept at 20%
Precise targeting optimization based on lookalike audiences
Dynamic creative optimization (DCO) to personalize ad content
Frequency capping to avoid ad fatigue




Tech Stack w/ Data Analysis & Visualization
What are your preferred tools and technologies for data analysis and visualization? How proficient are you with SQL and at least one statistical programming language (e.g., R, Python)?
SQL
Querying databases, extracting data, and building custom datasets for analysis
Statistical Analysis & Modeling
Python (Pandas, Scikit-learn, Statsmodels)
Visualization
Amplitude, Looker, Adobe Analytics, PowerBI




Campaign Measurement & Marketing ROI
How do you approach measuring the ROI of marketing campaigns? Can you describe a time you identified an underperforming campaign and the steps you took to improve its effectiveness?












Measuring marketing ROI is critical. I focus on aligning campaign goals with measurable KPIs, like customer acquisition cost (CAC), lifetime value (LTV), and return on ad spend (ROAS). At Adobe, we had a social media campaign promoting a new feature in Photoshop that was underperforming. Analyzing the data, I found that while the campaign had high engagement, the click-through rate to the product page and subsequent trial sign-ups were low. Through A/B testing of ad creatives and landing pages, we discovered that simplifying the messaging and using a more direct call-to-action significantly improved performance. We also adjusted our targeting to focus on more engaged users based on past interaction with Photoshop content. These changes reduced the CPA by 20% and increased trial sign-ups by 10% within two weeks."



II. Strategic Thinking & Business Acumen

Question 4: "How do you translate complex data analysis into actionable insights for non-technical stakeholders, like marketing leadership?"
Your Answer: "I believe in communicating data insights through clear, concise storytelling. I focus on highlighting the "so what" – the business implications of the data. At Adobe, I presented the results of our attribution modeling analysis to the VP of Marketing. Instead of focusing on the technical details of the model, I framed the findings in terms of customer journeys and budget allocation. I visualized the customer journeys and showed how different channels contributed to conversions, illustrating the impact of each channel on revenue. This helped the VP understand the value of each channel and make informed decisions about budget allocation, ultimately leading to a more efficient and effective marketing strategy."

Question 5: "How would you go about developing a data-driven marketing strategy for a new product launch?"
Your Answer: "For a new product launch, I would start by defining clear, measurable objectives. Then, I would develop a robust data collection plan to track relevant KPIs. This would involve collaborating with other teams to ensure data from all touchpoints (website, CRM, social, etc.) is captured. I would use data to identify the target audience and segment them based on demographics, behavior, and needs. I would then leverage A/B testing and experimentation to optimize messaging, channel selection, and offers during the initial launch phase. Continuous monitoring and analysis would be crucial to identify areas for improvement and iterate on the strategy based on real-time performance data. At Adobe, for the launch of a new mobile photo editing app, I used this approach and it resulted in a very successful launch with higher than forecasted user acquisition in the first month."

Question 6: "How do you stay up-to-date with the latest trends and advancements in marketing analytics and data science?"
Your Answer: "I'm a firm believer in continuous learning. I subscribe to industry publications like AdExchanger and Marketing Land, follow thought leaders on LinkedIn and Twitter, and attend conferences like MarTech and the Data Science Summit. I'm also an active member of online communities like the Analytics Vidhya forum, where I participate in discussions and learn from other practitioners. I regularly take online courses on platforms like Coursera and edX to deepen my knowledge of specific topics, such as advanced machine learning techniques and causal inference."
III. Leadership & Collaboration

Question 7: "Describe your leadership style and experience managing a team of analysts. How do you foster a culture of data-driven decision-making within your team and across the organization?"
Your Answer: "My leadership style is collaborative and empowering. I believe in setting clear goals, providing my team with the resources and support they need, and then trusting them to execute. At Adobe, I led a team of five analysts. I fostered a data-driven culture by encouraging experimentation, promoting knowledge sharing, and celebrating successes. We had weekly meetings where team members would share their findings, challenges, and best practices. I also worked closely with other teams, like product and sales, to ensure that data insights were integrated into their decision-making processes. I organized workshops and training sessions to educate them on how to interpret data and use it to inform their strategies. I aim to develop a strong team of independent thinkers, while still being available to provide guidance and support."

Question 8: "How do you handle conflicting priorities and manage stakeholder expectations when working on multiple projects?"
Your Answer: "Prioritization is key. I use a framework that considers the potential impact, urgency, and feasibility of each project. I also believe in transparent communication. I regularly communicate with stakeholders to keep them informed of progress, challenges, and any necessary adjustments to timelines or deliverables. At Adobe, I implemented a project management system that allowed us to track progress, allocate resources, and identify potential roadblocks. This system provided visibility to all stakeholders and helped us manage expectations effectively. I also held regular meetings with stakeholders to discuss priorities and ensure alignment on project goals."

Question 9: "Can you provide an example of a time when you had to influence a key decision-maker using data, even when they were initially resistant to the idea?"
Your Answer: "At Adobe, we were considering launching a new subscription bundle. The initial proposal was based on gut feeling rather than data. I led an analysis that combined customer purchase history, survey data, and market research. The data clearly showed that a different bundle configuration, tailored to a specific customer segment, would have a much higher probability of success. The VP was initially resistant, as he was attached to the original proposal. I presented my findings in a clear, compelling way, highlighting the potential revenue gains and reduced risk associated with the data-backed bundle. I also addressed his concerns by showing him the data that supported my recommendations. Ultimately, he was convinced by the data and decided to go with the new bundle configuration, which proved to be a significant success."



-









C. Data Management & Technology Infrastructure
The foundational layer of technology and processes that enables all analytics work.
Data Pipelines & ETL (Extract, Transform, Load)
Process Automation: Streamlining and automating data extraction, transformation, and loading processes from various sources.
Pipeline Development: Designing, implementing, and maintaining robust and scalable data pipelines.
Database Integration: Integrating data from disparate sources (CRM, web analytics, ad platforms) into a centralized data warehouse.
Data Modeling & Architecture
Data Warehouse Management: Defining the roadmap and architecture for the Data Warehouse (e.g., Snowflake), including metrics, dimensions, and data models.
Infrastructure Collaboration: Working closely with Data Engineering to translate business requirements into technical specifications for data infrastructure.
Integration Architecture: Architecting integrations between data platforms to drive more activation and value.
Data Governance & Quality
Data Integrity: Ensuring data accuracy, consistency, and reliability through robust data governance and quality control practices.
Definition Management: Owning data governance, documentation, and the management of data definitions.
Tagging & Instrumentation: Defining and managing instrumentation standards and tagging needs for analytics tools (e.g., Google Analytics, GTM).
Technology Stack & Tools
Tool Management: Acting as a go-to resource and expert for web analytics tools (Google Analytics), BI tools, and testing platforms (Optimizely).
Tech Stack Construction: Building and optimizing a digital demand generation and marketing analytics tech stack.

II. Key Functional Areas of Application
This section details how marketing analytics is applied to specific marketing disciplines mentioned in the text.
A. Paid Acquisition & Performance Marketing (PAPM)
Strategy & Planning: Developing comprehensive paid search/media strategies, managing multi-million dollar budgets, and setting performance targets (ROI, ROAS, CAC).
Campaign Management (SEM & Social): Managing and optimizing campaigns on platforms like Google Ads, Microsoft Ads, Meta, and LinkedIn, including bidding strategies, keyword research, and ad copy A/B testing.
Analytics & Optimization: Analyzing campaign performance, building ROI models, and using data to make informed decisions for budget allocation and campaign improvements.
Technology & Innovation: Evaluating and adopting new advertising technologies and staying updated on industry trends and algorithm changes.
B. Organic Acquisition & User Growth (OAUG) / SEO
SEO Strategy: Developing and executing a comprehensive SEO roadmap across technical, content, and off-page dimensions to increase organic traffic and rankings.
Technical SEO: Optimizing site architecture, speed, crawlability, mobile-friendliness, and other technical factors.
Content & Keyword Strategy: Conducting keyword research, informing content creation, and optimizing on-page elements like title tags and meta descriptions.
Analytics & Reporting: Monitoring traffic, rankings, and conversions using tools like Google Search Console, SEMrush, and Ahrefs to measure the impact of SEO initiatives.
C. Product (Marketing & Growth) Strategy
Product-Led Growth (PLG): Using analytics to design and evaluate PLG experiments and analyze the success of new features.
User Behavior Analysis: Analyzing user data (cohorts, segmentation, funnels) to uncover patterns that inform product growth opportunities.
Cross-Functional Influence: Partnering with Product, Engineering, and Design teams to translate data insights into product roadmap development and enhancements.

III. Hierarchy of Key Qualifications & Skills
This is a prioritized list of skills and qualifications, from essential foundations to specialized expertise.
Tier 1: Foundational Requirements
Experience Level: 5+ years in marketing analytics, data science, or a related highly analytical role.
Core Technical Skill: Expertise in SQL for querying, data wrangling, and manipulating large, complex datasets.
Business Acumen: Strong understanding of marketing principles, business objectives, and financial metrics (ROI, LTV, CAC).
Communication: Exceptional ability to communicate complex concepts and data stories to both technical and non-technical stakeholders.
Problem-Solving: Strong analytical and critical thinking skills to translate ambiguous business problems into analytical frameworks.
Tier 2: Core Competencies
Statistical Programming: Proficiency in a statistical language like Python (Pandas, scikit-learn) or R.
BI & Visualization Tools: Hands-on experience building dashboards and reports in tools like Tableau, Looker, or Power BI.
Web Analytics Platforms: Deep experience with Google Analytics (GA4), including implementation, reporting, and analysis.
Experimentation: Proven experience with A/B testing design, execution, and statistical analysis.
Attribution Modeling: Deep understanding of and hands-on experience with various marketing attribution models (MTA, MMM, etc.).
Tier 3: Advanced & Specialized Skills
Data Infrastructure & Modeling: Experience with data warehousing (Snowflake, BigQuery), ETL processes, and data modeling tools (e.g., dbt).
Leadership & Management: 2-3+ years of experience leading, coaching, and managing a team of analysts.
Ad Platforms: Hands-on-keys experience with digital advertising platforms (Google Ads, Facebook Ads, etc.).
SEO Tools: Familiarity with SEO tools such as SEMrush, Ahrefs, Screaming Frog, and Google Search Console.
Advanced Statistics: Knowledge of advanced techniques like regression, clustering, and predictive modeling.



Strategic Planning and Influence
This is the highest level of contribution, focused on setting the direction and ensuring the analytics function creates business value. It involves moving beyond reactive reporting to proactively shaping business strategy.
Develop and Lead Strategy: Create and oversee a comprehensive marketing analytics strategy that aligns with overarching business objectives and client goals. This includes owning the marketing operations roadmap and identifying future analytics capabilities.  
Influence Executive Decisions: Use data-driven insights to influence business and marketing strategy, advising senior leadership on where to prioritize investments. This requires presenting strategies in formats appropriate for audiences ranging from engineering teams to the board of directors.  
Champion a Data-Driven Culture: Act as a "strategic compass" for the organization's data efforts, educating business leaders on how to leverage analytics and fostering a culture of data-driven decision-making.  
Drive Business Growth: Directly connect analytical work to financial outcomes by identifying opportunities to improve revenue and profitability, evaluating market size, and contributing to the development of the overall company strategy.

Pillar 2: Insight Generation and Data Storytelling
At the core of the role is the ability to transform complex data into clear, compelling, and actionable intelligence. This goes far beyond creating charts; it is the art of building a narrative that persuades and inspires action.
Translate Data into Narrative: Synthesize and interpret complex data from multiple sources to uncover trends, patterns, and insights. The key is to translate these findings into clear, compelling data stories that resonate with both technical and non-technical audiences.  
Visualize and Present Findings: Create, maintain, and present a suite of dashboards, reports, and visualizations for stakeholders at all levels, including senior management. The goal is to effectively communicate insights and influence decisions through powerful data visualization.  
Provide Actionable Recommendations: Move beyond simply reporting on "what happened" to explaining "why it happened" and recommending "what to do next." This involves providing data-driven recommendations to optimize marketing strategies and improve business outcomes.  
Pillar 3: Advanced Analytics and Performance Optimization
This pillar represents the hands-on application of sophisticated analytical techniques to directly improve business results through a continuous cycle of testing, learning, and optimization.
Conduct Advanced Modeling: Apply advanced statistical analyses such as regression, predictive modeling, customer segmentation, and data mining to uncover growth opportunities.  
Measure Marketing ROI: Utilize advanced measurement techniques like Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM) and Multi-Touch Attribution (MTA) to understand the impact of different marketing touchpoints and measure the return on investment of campaigns.  
Design and Execute Experiments: Create and implement rigorous test designs, including A/B and multivariate tests, to evaluate marketing strategies and optimize campaign performance with statistical significance.  
Monitor and Optimize Performance: Constantly monitor funnel performance, track Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), and analyze campaign data to identify opportunities for continuous improvement.  
Pillar 4: Technical and Operational Management
This pillar covers the foundational work of managing the systems, processes, and infrastructure that make robust analytics possible. It is the engine room of the analytics function.
Oversee the Data Pipeline: Manage the collection, cleaning, and integration of marketing data from a wide variety of sources, including digital channels, CRM systems, and paid media platforms.  
Ensure Data Integrity: Be accountable for data integrity, accuracy, and consistency across all datasets and reporting frameworks, ensuring the business can trust the data it uses to make decisions.  
Manage the Analytics Tech Stack: Oversee the selection, implementation, and customization of the marketing technology stack, including data warehouses, BI platforms, and marketing automation tools.  
Collaborate with Technical Teams: Work closely with IT, data management, and engineering teams to align the data infrastructure with analytics needs and ensure the reporting framework is robust, scalable, and efficient.  
Pillar 5: Team Leadership and Cross-Functional Collaboration
An analytics leader's success is magnified through their ability to lead a team and work effectively across the entire organization. This pillar focuses on the human element of the role.
Lead and Develop Talent: Hire, inspire, mentor, and develop a team of high-performing analysts, fostering a collaborative environment focused on continuous learning and achieving key results.  
Manage Client and Stakeholder Relationships: Act as the primary analytics liaison for internal teams and external clients, cultivating strong relationships and ensuring their needs are met.  
Drive Cross-Functional Initiatives: Collaborate closely with partners in marketing, sales, product, IT, and finance to align on goals and use data to drive shared objectives.  
Manage Projects and Priorities: Effectively manage and prioritize a roadmap of both planned and ad-hoc analytics requests, allocating resources to ensure the timely delivery of high-quality work.


Skill Category
Key Technologies & Methods
Importance & Application


Data Querying & Manipulation
SQL, Excel
SQL is a non-negotiable, top-tier skill for querying databases and extracting data.  
Excel is a baseline competency for data manipulation.  
Statistical Programming
Python, R, SAS
Proficiency in Python or R is increasingly required for advanced statistical analysis, automation, and predictive modeling.  


Data Visualization & BI
Tableau, Power BI, Google Data Studio
Mastery of a major BI platform like Tableau or Power BI is essential for creating dashboards and communicating insights visually.  


Marketing & Web Platforms
Google Analytics, CRM (e.g., Salesforce), Marketing Automation (e.g., HubSpot)
Deep knowledge of Google Analytics is a universal requirement. Experience with  
CRM and Marketing Automation platforms is critical for a full-funnel view.  
Advanced Modeling
MMM/MTA, Predictive Modeling, Segmentation, Forecasting
Knowledge of advanced techniques like Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM) and Multi-Touch Attribution (MTA) is a key differentiator for measuring ROI.  






Core Responsibilities
Data Analysis & Reporting
Collecting and interpreting research about company consumers and their buying habits
Analyzing large amounts of data and presenting it in simple ways to management How to Become a Marketing Analyst in 2025 – 365 Data Science
Reporting on marketing KPIs like leads, conversion rates, website traffic and social media engagement Marketing Analyst Job Description [+2024 TEMPLATE]
Measuring, reporting and analyzing user behavior and marketing channel results across products, channel, platform and other performance segments Marketing Analytics Manager Job Description (+ Template and Three Examples)
Campaign Management & Optimization
Tracking advertising costs, researching consumer behavior and exploring market trends and opportunities Marketing Analyst Job Description [+2024 TEMPLATE]
Managing a company's pay-per-click (PPC) ad campaigns and running marketing and advertising strategies that require a paid online presence What Is a Digital Marketing Analyst? Your 2025 Career Guide | Coursera
Testing campaigns and making recommendations: testing and designing different types of ad campaigns and monitoring the results What Is a Digital Marketing Analyst? Your 2025 Career Guide | Coursera
A/B and multivariate testing for campaign optimization
Strategic Planning & Insights
Studies and analyzes market conditions, finds opportunities for business growth What is a Marketing Analyst?: Job Role and Responsibilities | Simplilearn
Turning data into insights - Digging into strategic initiatives, developing insights through analysis, synthesizing and clearly communicating analysis both written and verbal Marketing Analyst Job Description [Updated for 2024]
Making recommendations based on data collected, explaining to decision-makers how it will affect revenue or cost-effectiveness for their company What Does a Marketing Analytics Manager Do? Roles And Responsibilities - Zippia
Developing measurement plans and setting KPIs for marketing initiatives
Cross-functional Collaboration
Working closely with product owners and collaborating frequently with the sales team How to Become a Marketing Analyst in 2025 – 365 Data Science
Working closely with cross-functional teams to identify trends, optimize campaigns, and measure performance
Partnering with IT, operations, sales, and marketing teams
Technical Skills & Tools Required
Analytics Platforms
Google Analytics, Google Tag Manager, Google Data Studio Robert Halfnexus IT group
Adobe Analytics Marketing Analyst Job Description [Updated for 2024]
Sitecore Analytics Marketing Analytics Manager Job Description Template - nexus IT group
Web analytics and tracking technologies
Data Analysis & Programming
Strong quantitative skills, proficient in R, Python, and SQL Marketing Analytics Manager Job Description (+ Template and Three Examples)
Advanced Excel skills, basic knowledge of SQL and experience with data visualization tools like Domo and Tableau Robert HalfManatal
Statistics software, such as R, SAS, SPSS A Guide to a Career as a Marketing Analyst | Sellinger School of Business and Management | Loyola University Maryland
Data mining, modeling, and management capabilities
Business Intelligence & Visualization
Microsoft BI, and Adobe Analytics A Guide to a Career as a Marketing Analyst | Sellinger School of Business and Management | Loyola University Maryland
BI capabilities in Tableau What Does a Marketing Analytics Manager Do? Roles And Responsibilities - Zippia
Power BI for dashboard creation
Data visualization and dashboard development
Marketing Technology Stack
Marketing automation, customer relationship management (CRM) software Robert HalfManatal
Marketing software (Adobe Creative Suite and CRM), and applications (Web analytics, Google Adwords etc.) Marketing Specialist Job Description [Updated for 2025]
SEO/SEM tools (Moz Pro, Screaming Frog)
Social media analytics platforms



Marketing Analytics Manager: Role Summary
Title: Marketing Analytics Manager
Overview:
A Marketing Analytics Manager is a pivotal strategic and technical leader responsible for harnessing data to optimize marketing performance, inform business strategy, and drive measurable growth. This role sits at the intersection of marketing, data science, and business operations, requiring a deep understanding of marketing principles, advanced analytical techniques, robust data management practices, and exceptional leadership capabilities. The manager translates complex data into actionable insights, fosters a data-driven culture, and guides teams in leveraging analytics to achieve key business objectives, such as lead generation, customer acquisition, revenue growth, and enhanced customer experience. They are instrumental in driving accountability, improving efficiency, and ensuring marketing investments yield maximum ROI.
Core Pillars of a Marketing Analytics Manager Role
This section outlines the primary domains of responsibility that define the strategic and operational scope of a Marketing Analytics Manager.
I. Strategic Leadership & Business Alignment
This pillar focuses on how the Marketing Analytics function aligns with broader business goals and contributes to strategic planning, ensuring marketing efforts are effective, efficient, and measurable.
Understanding Business Objectives & Translating to Analytics Goals:
Details: Deeply understanding the company's overarching objectives (e.g., revenue growth, market share expansion, customer lifetime value, brand awareness) and translating them into specific, measurable marketing analytics initiatives. This requires close collaboration with senior leadership across various departments.
Actions: Actively participate in strategic planning sessions, conduct regular 1:1 meetings with senior leaders to grasp their departmental goals, and define marketing objectives that are directly aligned with overall business aspirations.
Outcome: Ensures that analytics efforts are strategically aligned, providing impactful insights that directly support and inform actionable business decisions and drive desired growth outcomes.
Developing Marketing Analytics Strategy & Roadmaps:
Details: Creating a clear vision and a tactical roadmap for the analytics team, outlining key projects, initiatives, and analytical tasks. This involves robust prioritization, balancing potential business impact, resource availability, and strategic alignment to ensure focus on the most valuable work.
Actions: Utilize prioritization frameworks (e.g., impact vs. effort matrix, RICE scoring), collaborate closely with stakeholders to understand their analytical needs, and continuously adapt the roadmap based on evolving business priorities and emerging insights.
Outcome: A well-defined plan that ensures the marketing analytics team is focused on high-value tasks, efficiently allocating resources, and delivering timely, impactful insights that drive business results.
KPI Framework Development & Measurement Strategy:
Details: Defining, establishing, and maintaining Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) and supporting metrics that accurately reflect marketing performance and impact across the entire customer journey and marketing funnel. This includes setting clear, measurable goals for all marketing activities.
Actions: Develop comprehensive KPI frameworks aligned with marketing funnel stages (awareness, consideration, acquisition, retention, advocacy), select SMART (Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, Time-bound) metrics, and define success metrics for individual campaigns and broader initiatives.
Outcome: A robust measurement framework that enables accurate performance tracking, facilitates the identification of areas for optimization, and clearly demonstrates marketing ROI and contribution to business goals.
Budget Management & Financial Acumen:
Details: Developing, managing, and optimizing marketing demand generation budgets and forecasts. This encompasses analyzing marketing spend efficiency, calculating Return on Investment (ROI) and Return on Ad Spend (ROAS), and making data-driven recommendations for budget allocation across various marketing channels and tactics.
Actions: Manage significant budgets (e.g., $20M+ monthly for paid media, $1.5M+ monthly budgets), create financial forecasts, conduct thorough ROI/ROAS analysis, and strategically allocate funds to maximize performance.
Outcome: Maximized return on marketing investments, efficient and strategic spend allocation, and clear financial accountability for marketing activities, ensuring resources are directed towards the most impactful initiatives.
Advocacy for Data-Driven Culture:
Details: Championing a culture where data and insights are integral to decision-making processes within the marketing department and the wider organization. This involves promoting the value and practical application of analytics.
Actions: Consistently share compelling data stories, present findings in a clear and concise manner that resonates with diverse audiences, educate stakeholders on the power and utility of analytics, and advocate for data-informed strategies at all organizational levels.
Outcome: An organizational culture that actively embraces data as a strategic asset, leveraging insights to make more informed decisions, improve operational efficiency, and drive sustainable business growth.
II. Data Foundation & Infrastructure Management
This pillar focuses on establishing and maintaining the critical data infrastructure, processes, and technologies required for reliable, accurate, and accessible analytics.
Data Collection, Integration & Warehousing Strategy:
Details: Ensuring accurate and comprehensive data capture from a diverse array of sources, including websites, CRM systems, social media platforms, ad networks, third-party APIs, and offline channels. This data is then unified into a central repository (e.g., data warehouse, data lake) for comprehensive analysis.
Actions: Identify all relevant data sources, define precise tracking requirements (e.g., Google Tag Manager implementation, event tracking definitions, UTM parameter standards), implement and manage Extract, Transform, Load (ETL) or Extract, Load, Transform (ELT) processes, build and maintain data pipelines, and ensure seamless data integration to create a holistic view of customer interactions and marketing touchpoints.
Outcome: A unified, accessible, and well-organized data environment that eliminates data silos and provides a complete, 360-degree view of customer behavior and marketing performance.
Ensuring Data Quality, Governance & Compliance:
Details: Implementing and enforcing robust standards and processes to guarantee data accuracy, consistency, completeness, and adherence to relevant data privacy regulations (e.g., GDPR, CCPA). This ensures the trustworthiness of the data used for analysis and decision-making.
Actions: Define clear data quality standards, conduct regular data audits and validation checks, implement data validation rules within pipelines, establish comprehensive data governance policies (covering data ownership, access controls, and usage guidelines), and ensure compliance with all applicable privacy regulations.
Outcome: High-quality, reliable, and compliant data that serves as a trusted foundation for all analytical activities, minimizing risks and ensuring ethical data handling.
Managing the Marketing Technology (MarTech) Stack:
Details: Selecting, implementing, integrating, and managing the suite of tools and technologies essential for marketing analytics, automation, and reporting. This includes web analytics platforms, marketing automation software, CRM systems, BI tools, and data visualization tools.
Actions: Evaluate and select tools that align with the team's needs and budget, manage vendor relationships effectively, ensure seamless integration between different martech components, and stay updated on emerging technologies to maintain a competitive edge.
Outcome: An efficient, integrated, and effective technology stack that empowers the analytics team to collect, process, analyze, visualize, and report on marketing data with maximum efficiency and impact.
Collaboration with Data Engineering & IT:
Details: Partnering closely with Data Engineering, IT, and other technical teams to translate complex business requirements into precise technical specifications. This collaboration is crucial for building scalable data architectures, developing robust data pipelines, and troubleshooting data-related issues.
Actions: Collaborate on the design and implementation of data models, pipeline architecture, API instrumentation, and the overall data infrastructure, ensuring alignment between business needs and technical capabilities.
Outcome: Seamless data flow, a robust and scalable data infrastructure, and efficient data processing mechanisms that are well-aligned with current and future business requirements.
III. Analytical Excellence & Insight Generation
This pillar encompasses the core analytical activities, ranging from routine reporting and performance tracking to advanced modeling and experimentation, all focused on uncovering actionable insights and driving continuous optimization.
Overseeing Performance Analysis & Reporting:
Details: Developing and maintaining regular, actionable reports and intuitive dashboards that effectively track marketing performance against defined KPIs. This provides stakeholders with clear visibility into campaign effectiveness, channel performance, and overall marketing impact.
Actions: Build automated dashboards using BI tools (e.g., Looker, Tableau), create regular performance reports, conduct weekly/monthly/quarterly performance reviews, provide consolidated roll-up reporting to senior management, and diligently monitor critical success metrics to ensure strategic alignment and identify performance deviations.
Outcome: Provides real-time performance visibility, facilitates the identification of trends and anomalies, and ensures a clear, ongoing understanding of marketing health and progress toward goals.
Driving Deep Dive Analytics, Modeling & Forecasting:
Details: Conducting in-depth analysis to understand the 'why' behind performance trends, applying advanced statistical methods, and building predictive models for forecasting, customer segmentation, and strategic optimization.
Actions: Execute a range of analyses including descriptive, inferential, and predictive statistics; build models for customer segmentation (e.g., RFM analysis, behavioral segmentation), churn prediction, lead scoring, and financial forecasting (e.g., demand, revenue); apply statistical techniques such as regression, clustering, and time series analysis.
Outcome: Uncovers the root causes of performance variations, identifies hidden opportunities, and enables proactive, data-driven decision-making through predictive insights and accurate forecasts.
Championing Experimentation (A/B Testing, Causal Inference):
Details: Fostering a culture of continuous learning and data-driven optimization through experimentation. This involves designing, overseeing, and analyzing rigorous tests (e.g., A/B, multivariate) to validate hypotheses and optimize various marketing elements.
Actions: Lead the design of experiments, mentor teams on testing methodologies and statistical rigor, analyze test results to drive data-informed decisions, identify opportunities for incrementality testing, and ensure the accurate measurement of impact.
Outcome: Data-driven optimization of campaigns, marketing creatives, landing pages, and user experiences, leading to incremental performance improvements and validated strategic choices.
Mastering Attribution & Marketing Mix Modeling:
Details: Developing, implementing, and managing advanced attribution models (e.g., multi-touch, data-driven) and Marketing Mix Models (MMM) to accurately measure the impact of various marketing channels and optimize media spend allocation.
Actions: Standardize and manage attribution models, conduct media mix modeling using statistical techniques, analyze campaign ROI and channel contributions, and provide strategic recommendations for budget allocation to maximize overall marketing effectiveness.
Outcome: Accurate measurement of marketing effectiveness, optimized channel mix, improved marketing ROI, and a clear understanding of the incremental impact of different marketing activities.
Data Storytelling & Visualization for Impact:
Details: Translating complex data findings into clear, concise, and compelling narratives that resonate with stakeholders. This involves using effective data visualization techniques to drive understanding, influence perception, and promote action-driven decisions.
Actions: Craft compelling data stories, build clear narratives that connect insights to business implications, utilize visualization tools to present findings engagingly, tailor communication strategies to specific audiences, and focus on delivering the 'so what' and actionable recommendations derived from the data.
Outcome: Ensures that analytical insights are effectively communicated, understood, and acted upon by stakeholders, leading to meaningful business impact and strategic adjustments.
IV. Team Leadership & Cross-Functional Collaboration
This pillar is dedicated to building and leading a high-performing analytics team and fostering seamless collaboration across departments to amplify the impact of data insights.
Building & Developing High-Performing Analytics Teams:
Details: Recruiting, training, mentoring, and developing a team of skilled marketing analysts possessing expertise in data analysis, statistical modeling, data visualization, and communication. The goal is to foster a culture of continuous learning, collaboration, and technical excellence.
Actions: Identify and recruit top talent, provide ongoing guidance and professional development opportunities, foster a culture of knowledge sharing and technical growth, set clear team goals, and manage performance effectively.
Outcome: A skilled, motivated, and efficient analytics team capable of delivering high-quality insights and robust support for all business needs.
Fostering Collaboration & Knowledge Sharing:
Details: Creating an environment where team members collaborate effectively, share best practices, and actively support each other's professional growth and development.
Actions: Establish clear communication channels, conduct regular team meetings for sharing findings and challenges, encourage peer reviews, and promote cross-pollination of ideas and skills across the team.
Outcome: An integrated and supportive team environment that maximizes collective knowledge, enhances problem-solving capabilities, and boosts overall team efficiency and output.
Stakeholder Management & Influencing Decisions:
Details: Managing diverse relationships with stakeholders across marketing, sales, product, and executive teams, ensuring alignment on analytics initiatives, and influencing key business decisions through data-backed insights and persuasive communication.
Actions: Communicate progress and findings regularly, manage stakeholder expectations transparently, actively seek to understand stakeholder needs, present findings persuasively, and build trusted partnerships based on reliability and insight.
Outcome: Strong alignment on analytics initiatives, widespread buy-in for data-driven recommendations, and effective integration of analytical insights into core business processes and strategic planning.
Process Optimization & Efficiency:
Details: Continuously evaluating and improving team processes, workflows, and automation capabilities to enhance overall productivity, efficiency, and the quality of analytics output.
Actions: Automate repetitive tasks, streamline reporting processes, document key workflows and best practices, implement effective project management tools, and efficiently manage vendor relationships to maximize resource utilization.
Outcome: An efficient and highly productive team that can deliver timely and high-quality results, freeing up analytical capacity for more strategic and high-impact work.
Essential Skillset and Proficiency
This section details the critical skills and proficiencies required for a Marketing Analytics Manager.
Technical Skills:
SQL:
Level: Expert
Description: Proficiency in writing complex queries, data extraction, manipulation, transformation, and building custom datasets for analysis. Essential for accessing and preparing data from various sources.
Python/R:
Level: Proficient
Description: For statistical analysis, data wrangling, modeling (e.g., Pandas, Scikit-learn, Statsmodels in Python; dplyr, ggplot2, caret in R). Used for deeper analysis, predictive modeling, and automation.
BI & Visualization Tools:
Level: Proficient
Description: Building interactive dashboards and reports (e.g., Tableau, Looker, Power BI). Includes proficiency in data storytelling and dashboard design best practices to convey insights effectively.
Web Analytics Platforms:
Level: Deep Understanding
Description: Expertise with tools like Google Analytics (GA4), Adobe Analytics, ContentSquare, FullStory. Crucial for understanding website and app user behavior, tracking events, and analyzing digital campaign performance.
Tag Management:
Level: Proficient
Description: Google Tag Manager (GTM), Adobe Launch, Tealium for deploying tracking codes, managing data capture, and ensuring data integrity across digital touchpoints.
Data Warehousing & ETL/ELT:
Level: Proficient
Description: Familiarity with cloud data warehouses (e.g., Snowflake, BigQuery, Redshift), data pipeline development, and ETL/ELT processes to integrate and transform data.
Marketing Automation & CRM:
Level: Familiarity
Description: Understanding tools like Salesforce, Marketo, HubSpot to grasp data flow, campaign context, and customer lifecycle stages.
Experimentation Platforms:
Level: Proficient
Description: Experience with tools like Optimizely, GrowthBook for designing, implementing, and analyzing A/B tests and other experiments.
Analytical and Statistical Skills:
Statistical Modeling: Applying techniques such as regression, ARIMA, clustering, classification for forecasting, segmentation, predictive analysis, and understanding causal relationships.
Attribution Modeling: Expertise in first-touch, last-touch, linear, time-decay, Markov chains, and data-driven attribution models to accurately measure channel impact.
Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM): Using statistical analysis to quantify the impact of various marketing channels on sales and brand KPIs, informing budget allocation.
Experimental Design: Proficiency in designing, executing, and statistically analyzing A/B tests, multivariate tests, and other experiments to validate hypotheses and optimize performance.
Data Wrangling & Cleaning: Skill in transforming raw, disparate, and often messy data into accurate, usable datasets suitable for analysis.
Root Cause Analysis: Ability to investigate performance dips or anomalies to identify underlying issues and propose data-driven solutions.
Forecasting & Trend Analysis: Predicting future outcomes and identifying emerging trends based on historical data and statistical methods.
Marketing Domain Knowledge:
Digital Marketing Channels: Comprehensive understanding of SEM, SEO, Paid Social (Meta, LinkedIn), Display, Programmatic, Video advertising, and Email Marketing.
E-commerce & Retail Metrics: Familiarity with metrics like Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO), Average Order Value (AOV), Basket Analysis, and Cart Abandonment.
Customer Lifecycle Management: Understanding and optimizing the entire customer journey, from acquisition and onboarding to retention and advocacy.
Key Marketing Methodologies: Deep knowledge of Customer Lifetime Value (LTV), ROI, CAC, Lead Scoring, and Funnel Analysis (TOFU, MOFU, BOFU).
Soft Skills:
Communication: Excellent verbal, written, and presentation skills; the ability to simplify complex data and technical concepts for non-technical stakeholders.
Data Storytelling: Translating raw data insights into compelling narratives that drive understanding, influence perceptions, and prompt action.
Stakeholder Management: Building strong, trusting relationships, managing expectations transparently, and influencing decisions across diverse teams and leadership levels.
Leadership & Mentorship: Guiding and developing analytics teams, fostering their professional growth, and cultivating a data-driven culture.
Problem-Solving & Critical Thinking: Ability to analyze ambiguous business problems, develop hypotheses, devise analytical approaches, and drive solutions to completion.
Project Management: Strong organizational skills to manage, prioritize, and execute multiple projects simultaneously in a fast-paced environment.
Adaptability & Continuous Learning: A proactive approach to staying current with evolving industry trends, tools, and methodologies in the rapidly changing analytics and marketing landscape.



Key Responsibilities
Across industries, core responsibilities converge on turning marketing data into actionable insights and strategy. Key duties typically include:
Developing Analytics Infrastructure & Strategy: Many roles involve building or improving the analytics framework. For instance, the American Restoration Senior Marketing Analytics Manager was to “lead the design and implementation of standardized analytics infrastructure” across brandsziprecruiter.com, and Publicis Sapient’s manager is tasked with enabling dashboards and analytic services for the marketing teamcareers.publicissapient.com. Directors often “oversee the strategic alignment of measurement and analysis plans with business objectives”ziprecruiter.com, essentially owning the analytics roadmap for the organization or clientsus.bebee.com.


Reporting & Dashboarding: Almost every posting emphasizes creating and maintaining reports, dashboards, and performance tracking. This can range from weekly KPI reports to executive dashboards. For example, Dataminr’s manager will “build and manage dashboards and reports in Looker, HockeyStack, and Salesforce” for decision-makingremotive.com, and Chewy’s role involves developing visualizations to support decision processesbuiltin.combuiltin.com. Consistency and clarity in reporting are crucial – Kimberly-Clark’s posting highlights defining KPIs and embedding ongoing reporting to drive continuous improvementbuiltin.com, while Infinity’s Director role focuses on interactive Tableau dashboards for stakeholdersziprecruiter.com.


Marketing Performance Analysis: Analyzing campaign and channel performance is central. Responsibilities include monitoring marketing funnels, conversion metrics, ROI, and identifying trends or anomalies. A finance industry posting involves interpreting campaign metrics for email and direct mail to improve targeting and ROIthelasallenetwork.com. Similarly, Google’s Cloud marketing analytics manager analyzes data to uncover trends and improve strategy for SMB and startup segmentsjobilize.comjobilize.com. Roles frequently mention “analyze customer acquisition and engagement metrics to optimize marketing across channels”remotive.com and “identify growth opportunities across markets and channels”builtin.com. In practice, this means deep-diving into multi-channel data (paid search, social, email, direct mail, etc.) to figure out what’s working and what isn’t.


Attribution & Advanced Analytics: Many postings, especially in digital-focused roles, list marketing attribution modeling and advanced analysis as key duties. For instance, the American Restoration role explicitly includes building marketing attribution models to connect spend to revenueziprecruiter.com. Infinity’s Director must “conduct advanced statistical analyses (regression, predictive modeling, segmentation)” to uncover trendsziprecruiter.com. Recorded Future’s senior manager is responsible for multi-touch attribution (first-touch, last-touch, etc.) and developing predictive models for pipeline generationremotive.comremotive.com. This trend shows that organizations want analytics leads who can go beyond basic reporting to model and predict outcomes, feeding into budget allocation and forecasting decisions.


Forecasting & Strategy Planning: Closely linked to attribution is the responsibility for forecasting marketing outcomes and informing strategy. Brightspeed’s manager role, for example, centers on developing models to forecast subscriber behavior (acquisition, churn) and scenario analysis for marketing strategiesremotive.comremotive.com. Recorded Future’s posting even separates a section for Marketing Forecasting & Predictive Modeling, involving predicting pipeline and revenue contribution from marketing and leveraging historical data to guide spend decisionsremotive.comremotive.com. In sum, these managers/directors are expected to provide forward-looking insights (e.g., pipeline projections, performance forecasts) that guide high-level marketing planning.


Collaboration & Stakeholder Communication: A key part of the job is working cross-functionally and communicating insights. Many postings highlight partnering with marketing leaders, sales, product teams, or agencies. For example, Marketbridge’s manager acts as primary point person for engagement delivery, managing client stakeholders and internal team membersremotive.comremotive.com. Feeld’s manager role is explicitly described as “player-coach”, remaining hands-on but also coaching a team and ensuring the marketing domain works on high-impact initiativesbuiltin.combuiltin.com. Moreover, presenting findings is emphasized: e.g., “present data-driven insights to senior leadership” or even preparing board-level reports (Dataminr’s role includes supporting board reporting on marketing contributionremotive.com). These responsibilities underscore that being able to influence stakeholders with clear narratives is as important as doing the analysis itselfziprecruiter.com.


Team Leadership & Mentoring: For director and some manager roles, leading and developing a team is a significant responsibility. Infinity’s Director must “mentor, supervise, and develop team members” and foster a collaborative, learning-focused cultureziprecruiter.com. CMI’s Director role explicitly includes leading a team of analysts and inspiring excellenceziprecruiter.comziprecruiter.com. Even some manager roles in consulting or agencies mention mentoring junior staff (Marketbridge: “help develop and mentor junior staff” on projectsremotive.com). Thus, many top postings expect candidates to not only execute analysis but also build analytics talent and champion a data-driven culture across their teamsremotive.comremotive.com.
Required Soft Skills
While technical chops are necessary, employers equally emphasize soft skills and business acumen that enable the analytics professional to drive impact:
Communication & Data Storytelling: This is the top soft skill mentioned. Marketing analytics managers must translate complex data into clear, actionable insights for non-technical stakeholdersziprecruiter.com. Many postings use terms like “excellent communication and storytelling skills to translate data into actionable insights for non-technical audiences”thelasallenetwork.com. Dataminr’s role highlights “strong storytelling skills with the ability to influence cross-functional teams using data”remotive.com. This entails not just reporting numbers but crafting narratives that drive decision-making. Whether presenting to senior leadership or collaborating with marketing colleagues, the ability to convey findings persuasively (often with visualizations and real-world context) is criticalziprecruiter.comziprecruiter.com.


Strategic Thinking & Business Insight: Employers seek analytics leads who think beyond the numbers – understanding marketing strategy and business goals. Phrases like “strategic thinker” or “strategic insights” appear often. For example, Infinity’s posting expects providing strategic guidance on data collection and analysis methodologies to improve ROIziprecruiter.com. A successful analytics manager uses data to guide strategic marketing decisions, identifying not just what happened, but why and what to do next. The Encima Group description hints at this by focusing on connecting analytics efforts to brand goals and best practicesziprecruiter.com. Many roles also involve advising on budget optimization and growth opportunities, requiring the analyst to see the bigger picture in the dataremotive.comhimalayas.app.


Collaboration & Stakeholder Management: Marketing analytics sits at the intersection of marketing, sales, finance, and IT. Being able to partner effectively across departments is crucial. Roles frequently mention working with cross-functional teams – e.g., “work closely with SEO, paid search, and creative teams”ziprecruiter.com or “partner with demand generation, product marketing, and sales”remotive.com. Soft skills here include the ability to build consensus and “align stakeholders” (as Code.org’s posting says) to maximize marketing impactremotive.com. Client-facing roles demand client relationship skills; the CMI Media Group director serves as a “trusted advisor” to clients and must nurture those relationshipsziprecruiter.com. In essence, being a team player who can lead through influence is key – analytics managers often lead by influence, driving a data-driven culture among people who may not report to them.


Leadership & Mentoring: For more senior roles or any position where the person will guide others, leadership skills are highlighted. This includes mentoring junior analysts, championing analytics within the organization, and sometimes formal team management. Phrases like “lead, mentor, and develop a team”ziprecruiter.com or “grow and develop the team professionally”builtin.com illustrate the expectation to coach others. Even in individual contributor roles, being a thought leader or analytics evangelist is part of the job – e.g., “champion a culture of continuous improvement by sharing insights and learnings” (from Code.org’s role)remotive.com. Leadership also means project management prowess – juggling multiple projects and deadlines. Many descriptions require strong project management and organizational skills to keep analytics initiatives on trackcareers.publicissapient.comremotive.com.


Problem-Solving & Analytical Curiosity: Successful candidates demonstrate a problem-solving mindset, always digging into the “why” behind the data. Chewy’s posting explicitly notes a “proven record to dig into the ‘why’ of results and present data-driven insights”builtin.com. Employers value curiosity and proactiveness – e.g., a “go-getter mentality” who tackles unknowns (Publicis Sapient)careers.publicissapient.com or someone “comfortable working in an exploratory environment, testing and iterating” (Samsara)himalayas.app. In practice, this means the analytics manager doesn’t just report metrics but investigates anomalies, suggests tests, and continuously seeks improvements. Being detail-oriented (ensuring data accuracy) yet able to see trends at a high level is a delicate balance noted in postingsremotive.comremotive.com.


Adaptability & Fast-Paced Execution: Marketing environments can be fast and dynamic, so flexibility is key. Many roles mention the ability to handle multiple priorities and adapt to change. Code.org references adapting to changing priorities in a mission-driven, fast-paced settingremotive.com, and Chewy notes candidates should work well in a fast-paced environment and with diverse, cross-cultural audiencesbuiltin.com. This often implies time-management, stress tolerance, and agility in adjusting analysis focus as marketing campaigns and questions evolve.


In summary, soft skills separate a technically good analyst from an effective marketing analytics leader. An ideal Marketing Analytics Manager/Director is not only a “numbers person” but also a communicator, strategist, and coach. As one FAQ insight succinctly states, beyond technical skills like SQL and Tableau, “strong soft skills like effective communication, strategic thinking, and leadership abilities are crucial for…collaborating with cross-functional teams”ziprecruiter.com. These capabilities ensure the insights discovered actually influence decisions and drive business value.
Tools & Platforms
The job postings collectively reference a wide array of tools and platforms, painting a picture of the technical ecosystem Marketing Analytics professionals operate in:
Web & Digital Analytics: Google Analytics (GA) is the most frequently mentioned, often the new GA4 version for web/app trackingziprecruiter.com. For instance, roles call for expert proficiency in GA4ziprecruiter.com and ability to configure conversion tracking. Adobe Analytics is listed for roles in enterprises (Golden 1us.bebee.com, Publicis Sapientcareers.publicissapient.com), indicating some companies use Adobe’s suite for omnichannel tracking. Being comfortable with tag management systems like Google Tag Manager is also important, as it goes hand-in-hand with web analytics for proper data collectionziprecruiter.com.


Business Intelligence & Dashboarding: Tools like Tableau, Power BI, Looker (and Looker Studio, formerly Google Data Studio) are common. Many postings explicitly mention these for dashboard creation – e.g., “comprehensive dashboards using Looker Studio, Power BI, or similar”ziprecruiter.com and building interactive Tableau dashboards for clientsziprecruiter.com. Domo or MicroStrategy are also noted in a few cases (Chewy mentions MicroStrategy as one of the BI tools)builtin.com. Mastery of at least one major BI platform is expected so that the manager can create and maintain insightful dashboards for stakeholders.


Databases & Query Languages: SQL databases (and related data warehouses) are a foundation. Roles cite experience with Snowflake, BigQuery, Redshift, Hive etc., reflecting the need to handle large datasetsziprecruiter.comcareers.abbvie.com. Knowledge of database design and writing optimized SQL queries is key for integrating multiple data sources (CRM, ads, web analytics) into one placeziprecruiter.comremotive.com. Some positions go further to mention managing a marketing data warehouse (Recorded Future)remotive.com or working with IT on data infrastructure (to ensure all marketing data streams are connected for analysis)remotive.comremotive.com.


CRM & Marketing Automation: Since tying marketing to revenue is crucial, expertise with CRM systems (Salesforce) and marketing automation platforms (e.g., Marketo, HubSpot, Pardot) is requested. Infinity’s Director post expects familiarity with Salesforce and even marketing automation like Salesforce Account Engagement (Pardot)virtualvocations.com. Recorded Future explicitly lists Marketo/HubSpot and Salesforce as must-havesremotive.comremotive.com. These tools are used for tracking lead lifecycle, attribution, and aligning with sales – analytics managers often have to pull data from them or ensure proper tagging of campaigns to flow into CRM. Some roles also mention email/CRM analytics as part of responsibilities (e.g., analyzing direct mail and email campaigns for the insurance role)thelasallenetwork.comthelasallenetwork.com.


Ad Tech and Media Platforms: Understanding of digital advertising platforms is expected in many roles. While not always named specifically, postings refer to Google Ads, Facebook Ads, DSPs, SEO and social platforms. For example, Brightspeed’s role includes advising e-commerce, online/offline advertising, brand and product dev teams as the “knowledge owner” for customer and market dataremotive.com. Feeld’s manager must ensure all martech and adtech tools are configured and fully leveragedbuiltin.combuiltin.com. Publicis Sapient mentions familiarity with marketing/media platforms like Google and LinkedIn ads and demand-side platformscareers.publicissapient.com. Essentially, an analytics manager should be able to work with data from Google Ads, Facebook/Instagram, LinkedIn, programmatic ad systems, email platforms, etc., and understand metrics like CPL, CPA, CTR across them.


Attribution & Marketing Analytics Tools: Specialized tools for multi-channel attribution and marketing measurement are cropping up in job requirements. For instance, HockeyStack (a marketing analytics/attribution tool) is listed in Dataminr’s and Recorded Future’s postingsremotive.comremotive.com. Infinity’s Director role notes experience with Adverity (a marketing data integration tool) as a plusziprecruiter.com. Google Looker Studio (Google Data Studio) is cited for visualization by multiple postingsziprecruiter.com. These tools indicate that companies are adopting dedicated solutions to consolidate and attribute marketing data, and they expect managers to navigate them or similar platforms.


Testing & Optimization Tools: While not always explicitly named, many roles involve A/B testing frameworks and possibly tools that support experimentation and personalization. The American Restoration role includes “Design and implement A/B testing frameworks for landing pages, ad creative, etc.”ziprecruiter.com, implying familiarity with testing tools or at least methodologies. Experience with statistical analysis for lift studies or marketing mix modeling is also relevant (Samsara requires knowledge of marketing lift studies and mix modeling)himalayas.app. Tools like Optimizely, Google Optimize (now sunsetted), or even built-in testing in marketing automation might fall under the expected toolkit, although postings focus on the concept more than brand names.


Strategic Planning and Alignment


Define Analytics Strategy: Work with marketing leadership to determine key objectives and metrics for campaigns, branding, and customer engagement initiatives.


Roadmap Development: Outline short-term and long-term analytics roadmaps aligned with organizational goals (e.g., improving return on advertising spend, boosting lead generation, refining customer segmentation).


Stakeholder Collaboration: Partner with executives and cross-functional teams (e.g., finance, product, sales) to ensure analytics efforts support broader business strategies.


Data Management and Governance


Data Collection Framework: Oversee how marketing data (e.g., website traffic, campaign performance, CRM data) is captured, stored, and integrated from various sources.


Data Quality Assurance: Implement processes to ensure data accuracy, completeness, and timeliness. This can include setting up data validation, building dashboards that flag anomalies, or managing data transformations within a data warehouse.


Compliance and Security: Work with legal and IT teams to ensure compliance with data privacy regulations (e.g., GDPR, CCPA) and implement security best practices for sensitive customer data.


Analysis and Insights


Performance Monitoring: Monitor key performance indicators (KPIs) such as cost per acquisition (CPA), customer lifetime value (LTV), click-through rates (CTR), or campaign ROI.


Trend Analysis and Forecasting: Identify patterns and shifts in customer behaviors and market trends; use statistical models to forecast future performance, demand, or campaign outcomes.


Opportunity Identification: Pinpoint underperforming channels or new growth opportunities; recommend actions like channel optimization, budget reallocation, or new segmentation strategies.


Reporting and Visualization


Dashboard Creation: Develop intuitive and dynamic dashboards that present complex analytics and KPIs in a simple, user-friendly format (e.g., using tools like Tableau, Power BI, or Looker).


Executive Summaries: Provide regular reporting to upper management, highlighting key insights, successes, and potential risks. Translate data findings into business language for non-technical audiences.


Automated Reporting: Implement self-service analytics tools and automated report distribution, enabling stakeholders to quickly access the metrics they need.


Team Leadership and Project Management


Team Oversight: Manage data analysts, data scientists, and other supporting roles within the marketing analytics team. Provide mentorship, training, and professional development opportunities.


Prioritization and Resource Allocation: Decide which analytical projects to pursue first based on impact, feasibility, and strategic alignment; ensure resources (budget, personnel) are allocated effectively.


Cross-functional Coordination: Collaborate with IT, marketing operations, creative, and product development teams to ensure that analytical insights can be implemented effectively.


Tool and Technology Evaluation


Tech Stack Selection: Assess, select, and maintain tools for data collection, data warehousing, dashboard creation, marketing automation, and experimentation (e.g., Google Analytics, Segment, HubSpot, Marketo).


Integration Oversight: Ensure seamless connectivity and data flow between systems (CRM, advertising platforms, social media channels, etc.).


Emerging Technologies: Stay informed about new tools, platforms, and techniques (e.g., AI-powered attribution models, predictive analytics) that could enhance the analytics function.


Campaign Optimization and Testing


A/B and Multivariate Testing: Plan and oversee tests across various marketing channels (email, website, social media ads) to optimize content, targeting, and budget allocation.


Real-time Adjustments: Use data insights to recommend changes mid-campaign; adjust creative elements, audience segments, or bidding strategies to improve results.


Continuous Improvement: Implement systematic review loops—evaluate test outcomes, iterate on strategies, and feed insights back into the planning process.


Communication and Advocacy


Data-driven Culture: Promote best practices in data usage and analytics thinking across the organization, advocating for decisions backed by quantitative evidence.


Knowledge Sharing: Conduct workshops, training sessions, and presentations to empower marketing and other teams with the analytical tools and knowledge they need.


Storytelling with Data: Translate raw analytics into compelling narratives that help decision-makers grasp the significance of findings and act accordingly.


Compliance and Ethical Considerations


Ethical Data Use: Uphold principles of responsible data usage, such as customer consent, anonymization, and fairness in targeting and reporting.


Risk Mitigation: Identify and manage potential risks associated with data handling, including biases in models or misinterpretations that could mislead strategy.


Success Metrics and Key Outcomes


ROI and Efficiency Gains: Demonstrate measurable improvements in marketing ROI, lower acquisition costs, and increased efficiency through data-informed decisions.


Enhanced Customer Understanding: Provide deeper insights into customer journeys, preferences, and behaviors to support personalization initiatives and customer retention strategies.


Organizational Impact: Influence business strategy by uncovering and quantifying opportunities for new market segments, product expansions, or partnership deals.


Below is a structured overview of the core pillars of Marketing Analytics, framed specifically from the perspective of a Marketing Analytics Manager. These pillars encompass the end-to-end responsibilities that ensure data-driven decisions in marketing strategy and execution.

1. Data Collection & Management
Data Source Identification


Definition: Identifying and cataloging all relevant data sources—this includes online channels (website, social media, email), offline channels (point of sale, call centers), third-party data providers, and customer relationship management (CRM) platforms.


Importance: Ensures a comprehensive view of the customer journey and marketing touchpoints.


Data Integration & Warehousing


Definition: Consolidating data into a single repository or data warehouse where it can be easily accessed and analyzed.


Key Considerations: ETL processes (Extract, Transform, Load), data schema design, data governance policies to maintain security and compliance.


Data Quality Assurance


Definition: Ongoing processes to cleanse, validate, and monitor data for accuracy, consistency, and completeness.


Impact: High data quality is foundational for credible analysis and insights.



2. Measurement & Attribution
Goal Setting & KPIs


Definition: Defining clear Key Performance Indicators that align with the organization’s marketing and overall business objectives (e.g., Customer Acquisition Cost, Lifetime Value, Conversion Rate).


Why It Matters: Helps track progress toward organizational goals and provides benchmarks for optimization.


Attribution Modeling


Definition: Methods to determine how different marketing touchpoints contribute to conversions or other desired outcomes.


Common Models: Last-click, first-click, linear, time decay, custom/data-driven models.


Challenges & Solutions: Multi-device and cross-channel tracking can complicate attribution; robust data collection, algorithms, and modeling are key to accurate analysis.


Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM)


Definition: A more macro-level view, analyzing the impact of marketing efforts (e.g., TV, digital, radio, print) on sales or brand metrics.


Manager’s Role: Overseeing statistical models and ensuring alignment with the brand’s strategic calendar, budget cycles, and campaign timelines.



3. Data Analysis & Insight Generation
Descriptive Analytics


Definition: Summarizing current and historical performance (e.g., dashboards showing campaign metrics, funnel analysis, cohort analysis).


Tools & Techniques: BI dashboards (Tableau, Power BI), basic SQL queries, pivot tables.


Diagnostic & Exploratory Analytics


Definition: Exploring data to find correlations, identify trends, and answer the “why” behind performance metrics.


Approaches: Root cause analysis, segmentation (e.g., RFM, demographic, behavioral), correlation analysis.


Predictive & Prescriptive Analytics


Definition: Using advanced statistical or machine learning models to forecast future outcomes or recommend optimal actions (e.g., churn prediction, next-best-offer modeling).


Manager’s Perspective: Overseeing cross-functional collaboration with data scientists or analysts, ensuring business context is embedded into the models, and validating model accuracy.



4. Reporting & Data Visualization
Dashboard Development


Definition: Creating real-time or scheduled dashboards to communicate performance metrics to stakeholders.


Best Practices: Keep dashboards simple, visually consistent, and aligned with the audience’s knowledge level.


Data Storytelling


Definition: Going beyond numbers to craft a narrative that explains insights, trends, and recommended actions.


Manager’s Role: Ensuring that insights are contextualized for decision-makers, avoiding data overload, and focusing on actionable takeaways.


Automated Reporting


Definition: Implementing scheduled email reports or triggering alerts for anomalies or significant changes in KPIs.


Value: Frees up time for deeper analysis by reducing manual reporting tasks.



5. Strategy & Stakeholder Management
Aligning Insights with Business Objectives


Definition: Translating analytics findings into strategic recommendations that resonate with marketing, finance, product teams, and senior leadership.


Example: Using data on customer segments to shape targeted campaigns or new product features.


Cross-Functional Collaboration


Definition: Working alongside other departments (e.g., Finance for budgeting, Product for feature usage data, Sales for CRM integration).


Manager’s Role: Ensuring that insights and data-driven recommendations inform not just marketing but any adjacent functions that can benefit from analytics.


Budgeting & Resource Allocation


Definition: Leveraging insights to decide how to allocate marketing spend across channels and tactics for maximum ROI.


Importance: Continuous improvement cycle—testing new channels, measuring outcomes, and reallocating based on performance.



6. Tools & Technology Stack
Analytics Platforms


Examples: Google Analytics (GA4), Adobe Analytics, Mixpanel, or enterprise BI systems.


Manager’s Responsibility: Selecting tools that fit the company’s scale and complexity, ensuring proper implementation (tagging, tracking codes, data architecture).


Marketing Automation & CRM


Examples: HubSpot, Marketo, Salesforce Marketing Cloud.


Value: Streamlines lead management, email campaigns, and personalization efforts, all of which feed back into the analytics ecosystem.


Data Management & Modeling Tools


Examples: SQL databases (PostgreSQL, MySQL), cloud data warehousing (Snowflake, BigQuery, Redshift), Python/R for modeling.


Manager’s Role: Overseeing the selection, integration, and efficient use of these platforms, often in collaboration with IT or Data Engineering teams.



7. Privacy & Compliance
Regulatory Frameworks


Examples: GDPR (Europe), CCPA (California), other data protection regulations worldwide.


Manager’s Role: Ensuring that data collection, storage, and usage practices meet compliance requirements, working closely with legal teams.


Ethical Data Usage


Definition: Balancing personalization and privacy, making transparent data policies for customers.


Importance: Builds customer trust and protects the brand’s reputation.


Security & Governance


Definition: Implementing secure access controls, encryption, and regular audits.


Value: Prevents data leaks, protects user information, and minimizes legal and financial risks.



8. Continuous Improvement & Experimentation
Testing Frameworks


Definition: Systematic approaches (A/B, multivariate testing) to validate hypotheses about marketing tactics (e.g., ad creative, landing page design).


Manager’s Role: Prioritizing test agendas, designing rigorous experiments, interpreting results accurately.


Iteration & Agile Marketing


Definition: Regularly revisiting analytics processes, KPIs, and campaign performance to refine strategies in real-time or near real-time.


Value: Encourages a culture of data-driven iteration, leading to incremental performance improvements and innovative marketing approaches.


Feedback Loops


Definition: Incorporating learnings from campaigns back into the planning and decision-making cycle.


Outcome: Ongoing optimization and better alignment with market changes and evolving consumer behavior.


1. Core Functional Areas & Responsibilities
Campaign Performance Analysis


Tracking effectiveness of digital and offline campaigns


Identifying areas for improvement in funnel metrics


Budget & ROI Optimization


Analyzing return on ad spend (ROAS)


Allocating marketing resources effectively


Customer Insights & Segmentation


Developing and analyzing customer segmentation models (RFM, demographic, behavioral)


Identifying target audiences and personalization opportunities


Attribution & Reporting


Building and maintaining attribution models (first-touch, last-touch, multi-touch, data-driven)


Creating dashboards and executive reports


Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM)


Statistical modeling to determine impact of various marketing channels on sales/brand KPIs


A/B Testing & Experimentation


Designing and executing controlled experiments


Interpreting test results to drive data-driven decisions



2. Technical & Analytical Skills
Data Analysis & Statistics


Proficiency in statistical techniques (regression, hypothesis testing, ANOVA)


Familiarity with Bayesian methods or machine learning concepts


Data Management & SQL


Writing SQL queries for data extraction and manipulation


Database concepts (relational databases, data modeling)


Statistical Programming & Languages


Python (NumPy, pandas, scikit-learn) or R (dplyr, ggplot2, caret)


SAS or SPSS (less common but still relevant in some large enterprises)


Business Intelligence & Visualization Tools


Tableau, Power BI, Looker, QlikView, or equivalent


Data storytelling and dashboard design best practices


Data Warehousing & ETL Tools


Familiarity with cloud data warehouses (Snowflake, BigQuery, Redshift)


Experience with data pipelines and workflow orchestration (Airflow, dbt)



3. Marketing Domain Knowledge
Digital Marketing Channels


Search Engine Marketing (SEM), Search Engine Optimization (SEO)


Social Media Advertising (Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn Ads)


Display, Programmatic, Video advertising


Web & App Analytics


Google Analytics (GA4), Adobe Analytics, Mixpanel, Amplitude


Understanding user journeys and event tracking


CRM & Email Marketing


Tools like Salesforce, Marketo, HubSpot


Lead scoring, lifecycle marketing, nurturing campaigns


E-commerce & Retail Metrics


Conversion rate optimization (CRO)


Basket analysis, average order value (AOV), cart abandonment


Offline/Traditional Media


TV, radio, print


Measuring impact on brand metrics and correlating with sales lift



4. Key Methodologies & Frameworks
Customer Lifetime Value (LTV) Analysis


Calculating how much revenue a customer generates over their entire relationship with the business


Used for acquisition budget decisions, retention strategies


Attribution Modeling


Last-click, first-click, linear, time decay, or custom/data-driven models


Determining the true impact of each touchpoint


Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM)


Applying regression or other statistical methods to understand incremental impact of channels


Budget allocation and channel optimization


Predictive Analytics


Churn prediction, propensity modeling, next-best-action


Leveraging advanced ML or AI algorithms


A/B Testing & Multivariate Testing


Common frameworks: Designing tests, randomization, significance testing


Tools: Google Optimize, Optimizely, VWO, Adobe Target



5. Soft Skills & Cross-Functional Collaboration
Communication & Data Storytelling


Translating complex analytical findings into simple, actionable insights


Presenting to stakeholders of varying technical backgrounds


Stakeholder Management


Collaborating with marketing teams, product managers, sales, finance, and senior leadership


Understanding business goals and ensuring alignment with analytics projects


Project Management


Managing analytics initiatives from ideation to delivery


Applying agile or waterfall approaches for timely execution


Critical Thinking & Problem-Solving


Identifying root causes of performance issues


Proposing data-driven solutions and testing them


Adaptability & Continuous Learning


Staying current with evolving marketing technologies and data privacy regulations


Eagerness to adopt new analytical methods or tools



6. Common Tools & Technologies
Web Analytics Platforms


Google Analytics (GA4), Adobe Analytics, Mixpanel, Amplitude


Tag Management & Tracking


Google Tag Manager (GTM), Adobe Launch, Tealium


CRM & Marketing Automation


Salesforce Marketing Cloud, Marketo, HubSpot


BI & Reporting Tools


Tableau, Power BI, Looker, Qlik


Databases & Data Warehouses


SQL databases (MySQL, PostgreSQL), NoSQL (MongoDB)


Cloud platforms (Snowflake, BigQuery, Redshift)


Advanced Analytics Tools


Python, R, SAS, SPSS


ML frameworks (TensorFlow, PyTorch) – less common in smaller teams but present in advanced data science roles



7. Compliance & Governance Knowledge
Data Privacy Regulations


GDPR (EU), CCPA (California), HIPAA (health-related data)


Best practices for anonymization and consent management


Ethical Data Usage


Knowledge of industry standards, avoiding dark patterns


Maintaining customer trust and brand reputation


Security & Access Control


Role-based access to data, encryption best practices


Collaboration with IT and cybersecurity teams



8. Job Titles & Role Descriptors
Marketing Analyst


Entry to mid-level role focusing on daily reporting and performance analysis


Marketing Analytics Manager


Oversees analytics team or projects, aligns analytics with strategic business goals


Data Scientist (Marketing Focus)


Applies advanced statistical and ML methods specifically to marketing problems


Marketing Operations Analyst


Focuses on marketing automation, process optimization, and CRM integration


Growth Analyst / Growth Marketing Manager


Blends analytics with experimentation to drive user acquisition and retention


Digital Marketing Analyst


Specializes in digital channels, ad platforms, and web analytics



9. Keywords & Phrases Frequently Associated with Marketing Analytics
ROI (Return on Investment)


ROAS (Return on Ad Spend)


CPA (Cost Per Acquisition)


CLV or LTV (Customer Lifetime Value)


CAC (Customer Acquisition Cost)


Funnel Analysis (TOFU, MOFU, BOFU)


Attribution Model


Predictive Modeling


Forecasting & Trend Analysis


Dashboards & Reporting


Data-Driven Decision Making


KPI Frameworks


Big Data & Advanced Analytics


Customer Segmentation


Cohort Analysis


Cross-Channel / Omnichannel Analytics


Statistical Significance


Regression Analysis


Machine Learning (Supervised, Unsupervised)


Test & Learn Approach


Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM)


Brand Equity & Brand Tracking


Lift Analysis


Incrementality Testing




1. Statistics & Mathematics
- Probability & Statistics
Descriptive Statistics (Mean, Median, Mode, Variance, Standard Deviation)


Probability Distributions (Binomial, Normal, Poisson, etc.)


Hypothesis Testing (t-tests, ANOVA, Chi-Square)


Bayesian Statistics


- Data Modeling
Regression Analysis (Linear, Logistic, Multivariate)


Time Series Analysis


Predictive Modeling


- Experimental Design
A/B Testing


Multivariate Testing


Sample Size Calculation


- Advanced Mathematics
Matrix Algebra (for machine learning models)


Calculus (for optimization problems)



2. Marketing
- Earned Acquisition
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)


Keyword Research


On-Page Optimization


Off-Page Optimization (Backlink Building)


Technical SEO (Crawl Optimization, Schema Markup)


Content Strategy & Management


Content Calendar Development


Content Optimization (SEO-driven content creation)


Analytics for Content Performance (Bounce Rate, Scroll Depth)


- Paid Acquisition
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)


Google Ads (Keyword Bidding, Ad Extensions)


Bing Ads


Social Media Marketing (SMM)


Facebook Ads (Audience Targeting, Lookalike Audiences)


LinkedIn Ads


TikTok Ads


Pinterest Ads


Programmatic Advertising


Display Ads


Retargeting Campaigns


- Email Marketing
Campaign Automation


Email A/B Testing (Subject Lines, Copy, Images)


Conversion Tracking


- Affiliate Marketing
Partner Recruitment & Management


Tracking & Attribution


- Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO)
Funnel Analysis


Landing Page Optimization


- Branding & Public Relations
Brand Sentiment Analysis


Earned Media Analytics



3. Analytics
- Data Analysis
Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM)


Attribution Modeling (First Touch, Last Touch, Multi-Touch)


- Reporting & Dashboards
Google Analytics (GA4)


Looker Studio (formerly Google Data Studio)


Tableau/Power BI


SQL for Custom Reporting


- Campaign Analysis
Return on Ad Spend (ROAS)


Cost Per Acquisition (CPA)


Customer Lifetime Value (CLV)


- Data Warehousing & ETL
Data Integration (APIs, Data Pipelines)


Tools: BigQuery, Snowflake, Redshift



4. Technology & Tools
- Marketing Analytics Platforms
Google Analytics, Adobe Analytics


Mixpanel, Amplitude


HubSpot, Marketo


- Advertising Platforms
Google Ads Manager


Facebook Ads Manager


- Data & Visualization Tools
Tableau, Power BI


Looker, QlikView


- Programming Languages
Python (for Data Analysis, Visualization, Automation)


R (for Statistical Analysis)


- Data Storage & Manipulation
SQL


Excel (Advanced Functions, Pivot Tables, Macros)


- Tracking Technologies
Google Tag Manager


Pixels and UTM Parameters



5. Leadership & Strategy
- Strategic Planning
Setting KPIs


Budget Allocation


- Stakeholder Management
Cross-Functional Communication (Marketing, Product, Finance)


- Team Management
Hiring & Training Analytics Teams


Defining Roles and Responsibilities


- Vendor/Tool Management
Evaluating Software Tools


Managing External Agencies



6. Data Science & Machine Learning (Optional Advanced Skills)
- Predictive Analytics
Churn Prediction


Forecasting


- Natural Language Processing (NLP)
Sentiment Analysis


Text Classification


- Clustering & Segmentation
Customer Segmentation


Behavioral Segmentation


- Algorithms
Decision Trees, Random Forests, Gradient Boosting


Neural Networks (for advanced marketers)



7. Industry Trends & Compliance
- Privacy & Compliance
GDPR


CCPA


- Industry Trends
Rise of First-Party Data


Cookieless Future and Tracking Alternatives


- Marketing Innovation
AI for Ad Targeting


Voice Search Optimization



Keyword
Category
Subcategory
metrics analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
reporting automation
Analytics
Data Visualization
business analytics and intelligence
Analytics
Data Analysis
communication
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
data analytics
Analytics
Data Analysis
data gathering and manipulation
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
mma/mta attribution models
Analytics
Attribution Models
media measurement
Analytics
Attribution Models
lifetime value (ltv)
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
return-on-investment (roi)
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
cost-per-acquisition (cpa)
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
customer acquisition cost (cac)
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
user acquisition, activation and retention
Marketing Performance
User Acquisition
etl
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
data integrity
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
sql
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
data processes
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
automated reporting dashboards
Analytics
Data Visualization
key business decisions
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
marketing performance reporting
Marketing Performance
Campaign Analysis
campaign analysis
Marketing Performance
Campaign Analysis
campaign attribution
Analytics
Attribution Models
forecasting techniques
Strategic Insights
Forecasting
data visualization
Analytics
Data Visualization
sql and query writing
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
python/r programming
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
performance dashboards
Analytics
Data Visualization
marketing roi analysis
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
marketing roi analysis
Marketing Performance
Campaign Analysis
customer retention analysis
Marketing Performance
User Acquisition
predictive modeling
Strategic Insights
Forecasting
data visualization tools
Analytics
Data Visualization
power bi
Analytics
Data Visualization
python for data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
python for data analysis
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
bigquery
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
cross-functional communication
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
churn rate
Marketing Performance
User Acquisition
roi analysis
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
marketing roi
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
marketing roi
Marketing Performance
Campaign Analysis
communications strategy
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
executive communication
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
return on investment (roi)
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
user acquisition strategy
Marketing Performance
User Acquisition
retention analysis
Marketing Performance
User Acquisition
communication strategies
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
roi measurement
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
tableau
Analytics
Data Visualization
microsoft power bi
Analytics
Data Visualization
etl best practices
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
create automated reporting and dashboards
Analytics
Data Visualization
promote best practices in etl processes
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
manage data processes for marketing measurement
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
data integrity and validation
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
communication of insights and recommendations
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
excellent communication skills
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
sql with 5+ years of experience
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
scripting for automation in python or similar languages
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
advanced sql skills
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
programming in r
python


data analysis and reporting
Analytics
Data Analysis
written communication
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
marketing data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
statistical data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
python
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
python (programming language)
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
analytics engineering & management - customer acquisition cost (cac) optimization
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
executive reporting
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
lifetime value (ltv) modeling
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
sqlite
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
mysql
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
advanced data analytics
Analytics
Data Analysis
data visualization and reporting tools tableau power bi
Analytics
Data Visualization
lead data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
marketing campaign analysis
Marketing Performance
Campaign Analysis
marketing data analytics
Analytics
Data Analysis
marketing trends and data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
ability to write complex sql queries
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
ability to write sql
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
data analysis techniques
Analytics
Data Analysis
marketing roi maximization
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
marketing roi maximization
Marketing Performance
Campaign Analysis
data visualization approaches
Analytics
Data Visualization
big data analytics
Analytics
Data Analysis
client data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
communication skills
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
communication and presentation skills
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
collaboration and communication
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
communication strategy
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
communication tools
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting




Keyword
Category
a/b testing; ab testing
-
ability to connect marketing data with business goals
Analytics
ability to see past the numbers
-
ability to thrive in ambiguous situations
-
ability to translate between data and business needs
Analytics
ability to write and communicate clearly
-
ability to write and deliver training
-
ability to write and design process maps
-
ability to write and edit professional presentations in a variety of multimedia formats
-
ability to write and present documentation
-
ability to write and publish analytical reports
-
ability to write clear and concise reports
-
ability to write clearly and effectively
-
ability to write code
-
ability to write complex sql queries
Data Engineering
ability to write content in a variety of styles and tones
-
ability to write correspondence
-
ability to write cyber investigative reports
-
ability to write effective reports and presentations
-
ability to write excel functions
-
ability to write for publication
-
ability to write policies and procedures
-
ability to write professional correspondence
-
ability to write reports and procedure manuals
-
ability to write routine reports
-
ability to write simple correspondence
-
ability to write sql
Data Engineering
able to draw conclusions
-
able to handle multiple tasks
-
able to independently prioritize work assignments meet deadlines and manage multiple projects
-
able to think critically and demonstrate logical reasoning
-
able to work both independently and in a teamoriented collaborative environment
-
able to work independently and as part of a team
-
abm account based marketing
-
abm campaigns
Marketing Performance
abm content strategy
-
abm digital ad and reporting platforms
Analytics
abm execution
-
abm frameworks
-
abm marketing
-
abm marketing campaigns
Marketing Performance
abm platforms
Tools & Platforms
abm programs
-
abm strategies
-
abm strategy
-
account management
-
account-based marketing (abm)
-
acquisition & retention strategies
Customer Experience
acquisition channels
Customer Experience
action-oriented decision making
Strategic Insights
action; actions
-
activation metrics
Marketing Performance
activecampaign
Marketing Performance
ad hoc investigations
-
ad hoc;
-
adhoc investigations
-
adobe analytics
Analytics
adobe creative cloud
-
advanced analytics
Analytics
advanced data analytics
Analytics
advanced excel
-
advanced sql skills
Data Engineering
advertising
-
advertising;
-
affiliate management
-
affiliate marketing
-
ahrefs
-
airflow
-
algorithm updates
-
alignment with product development
-
alignment with product teams
-
alignment with sales teams
-
amazon advertising and e-commerce
-
amazon redshift
-
analysis
Analytics
analysis; analyses, analyzing, analyzed
Analytics
analytic skills
-
analytical and statistical rigor in decision-making
Strategic Insights
analytical capabilities
-
analytical modelling
-
analytical statistical rigor
-
analytical thinking
-
analytics
Analytics
analytics and reporting
Analytics
analytics engineering & management - customer acquisition cost (cac) optimization
Analytics
analytics tools
Analytics
analytics;
Analytics
analyze and interpret data
Analytics
analyze marketing data
Analytics
angular
-
api
-
api familiarity
-
api integration
-
api integrations
-
app install campaigns
Marketing Performance
app integration
-
app store optimization (aso)
-
areas improvement
-
asana
-
attribution analysis
Analytics
attribution modeling
Analytics
attribution models
-
attribution reporting
Analytics
attribution strategy
-
audience analysis
Analytics
audience analytics
Analytics
audience engagement
-
audience insights
Strategic Insights
audience measurement
Analytics
audience segmentation
-
audience strategy
-
audience targeting
-
audience understanding
-
automate; automated, automating
-
automated reporting dashboards
Analytics
awin
-
b2b marketing
-
b2b purchase process
-
b2c marketing
-
backlink analysis
Analytics
backlink building
-
base; based
-
bash
-
behavioral analysis
Analytics
best practices
-
big data analytics
Analytics
big data platforms
Analytics
bigquery
-
bing ads
-
brand awareness
-
brand building
-
brand consistency
-
brand development
-
brand management
-
brand marketing
-
brand messaging
-
brand positioning
-
brand strategy
-
brand24
-
branding
-
brandwatch
-
brightedge
-
budget analysis
Analytics
budget management
-
buffer
-
build; building, built
-
business analysis
Analytics
business analytics and intelligence
Analytics
business decisions
Strategic Insights
business development
Strategic Insights
business functions
Strategic Insights
business growth
Strategic Insights
business insights
Strategic Insights
business intelligence
Strategic Insights
business intelligence tools
Strategic Insights
business questions
Strategic Insights
business stakeholders
Strategic Insights
business trends
Strategic Insights
business;
Strategic Insights
buzzstream
-
campaign analysis
Analytics
campaign analytics
Analytics
campaign attribution
Marketing Performance
campaign kpi analysis
Analytics
campaign management
Marketing Performance
campaign optimization
Marketing Performance
campaign performance
Marketing Performance
campaign planning
Marketing Performance
campaign reporting
Analytics
campaign strategy
Marketing Performance
canva
-
causal inference
-
central bi team
-
challenging problems
-
change management
-
channel analysis
Analytics
channel marketing
-
channel mix optimization
-
channel performance
Marketing Performance
channel strategy
-
churn analysis
Analytics
churn rate
Customer Experience
cision
-
cj affiliate
-
clickmeter
-
client data analysis
Analytics
client engagement
-
client relationship management
-
cloud analytics
Analytics
cloud data warehouse
Analytics
cloud platforms
Tools & Platforms
cms optimization
-
cms or dam platform management
Tools & Platforms
cms platform
Tools & Platforms
cms platforms
Tools & Platforms
cms policy
-
cms programs
-
cms publishing tools
Tools & Platforms
cms reporting
Analytics
cms requirements
-
cms rules and regulations
-
cms systems
-
cms tools
Tools & Platforms
cms tools wordpress
Tools & Platforms
cms website
-
cms wordpress
-
coaching & mentoring
-
cohort analysis
Analytics
collaborate
-
collaborate with crossfunctional teams
-
collaborate with internal data science
-
collaboration and communication
Strategic Insights
collaboration and stakeholder engagement
-
collaboration and teamwork
-
collaboration with sales
-
collaborative
-
collaborative environment
-
collaborative skills
-
communicate with executive leaders and stakeholders
-
communicating results to senior leadership
-
communication
Strategic Insights
communication and presentation skills
Strategic Insights
communication of insights and recommendations
Strategic Insights
communication skills
Strategic Insights
communication strategies
Strategic Insights
communication strategy
Strategic Insights
communication tools
Strategic Insights
communications strategy
Strategic Insights
competitive
-
competitive analysis
Analytics
competitor analysis
Analytics
complex analysis
Analytics
connect; connecting
-
consult with cross-functional teams to develop kpis and automated reporting solutions
Analytics
consult; consulting, consulted
-
consumer behavior
-
consumer behavior analysis
Analytics
consumer insights
Strategic Insights
consumer market
-
consumer marketing
-
consumer research
-
content calendar management
-
content creation
-
content development
-
content management
-
content management system
-
content management system (cms)
-
content management systems
-
content marketing
-
content optimization
-
content performance analysis
Analytics
content strategy
-
content syndication
-
content writing
-
conversation analysis
Analytics
conversion optimization
-
conversion rate optimization
-
conversion rate optimization (cro)
-
conversion testing
-
coordination with sales
-
copywriting
-
core web vitals
-
cost optimization
-
cost-per-acquisition (cpa)
Marketing Performance
crawlability
-
crazy egg
-
create automated reporting and dashboards
Analytics
creative direction
-
creative testing
-
creative thinking
-
crisis management
-
critical thinking
-
crm
-
crm integration
-
crm tools
Tools & Platforms
cross-channel analysis
Analytics
cross-channel marketing
-
cross-functional
-
cross-functional collaboration
-
cross-functional communication
Strategic Insights
cross-functional initiatives
-
cross-functional leadership
-
cross-functional teams
-
css
-
cultural adaptability and ability to foster a supportive environment
-
customer acquisition
Customer Experience
customer acquisition cost (cac)
Customer Experience
customer analytics
Analytics
customer and market dynamics
-
customer centric organizations
-
customer engagement
-
customer experience
Customer Experience
customer experience (cx)
Customer Experience
customer experience analysis
Analytics
customer feedback
-
customer feedback analysis
Analytics
customer insights
Strategic Insights
customer journey
Customer Experience
customer journey analysis
Analytics
customer journey mapping
Customer Experience
customer lifetime value (clv)
-
customer relationship management
-
customer requirements
-
customer retention
Customer Experience
customer retention analysis
Analytics
customer retention metrics
Marketing Performance
customer retention strategies
Customer Experience
customer segmentation
-
customer success stories
-
customer; customers
-
dashboard creation
-
dashboard development
-
dashboard reporting
Analytics
dashboarding
-
data analysis
Analytics
data analysis and reporting
Analytics
data analysis techniques
Analytics
data analytics
Analytics
data collection and sorting
Analytics
data extraction manipulation analytics
Analytics
data gathering and manipulation
Analytics
data governance
Analytics
data infrastructure and integration
Analytics
data insights
Analytics
data integration
Analytics
data integrity
Analytics
data integrity and validation
Analytics
data management
Analytics
data mining
Analytics
data modeling
Analytics
data models
Analytics
data platforms
Analytics
data processes
Analytics
data processing
Analytics
data storytelling
Analytics
data strategy
Analytics
data tools
Analytics
data visualization
Analytics
data visualization and reporting tools tableau power bi
Analytics
data visualization approaches
Analytics
data visualization tools
Analytics
data warehousing
Analytics
data-driven
Analytics
data-driven decision making
Analytics
data-driven decision-making
Analytics
data-driven insights
Analytics
data-driven marketing
Analytics
data;
Analytics
data/bi space
Analytics
database management
Analytics
decision; decisions
Strategic Insights
demand forecasting
Strategic Insights
demand generation
-
demand generation strategy
-
demand trust transparency
-
descriptive analytics
Analytics
design and measure experiments
-
design, build, and maintain data infrastructure
Analytics
design; designing
-
designing and measuring testing experiments
-
designing, building, scaling, and maintaining
-
develop measurement strategies for clients
Analytics
develop scaled automated user-friendly systems
Customer Experience
develop; developing, developed, development
-
developing measurement strategies
Analytics
digital advertising
-
digital advertising solutions
-
digital analytics
Analytics
digital analytics software google analytics adobe analytics
Analytics
digital and direct marketing tactics
-
digital channels
-
digital marketing
-
digital marketing analytics
Analytics
digital marketing integration
-
digital marketing strategy
-
digital marketing technology familiarity
-
digital marketing tools
Tools & Platforms
digital retail landscape
-
digital strategy
-
digital transformation
-
display advertising
-
docker
-
drive internal strategic initiatives and problem solving
-
drive strategy
-
drive; driving, driven
-
dropbox
-
earned and paid media
-
ecommerce
-
efforts;
-
email marketing
-
email marketing strategies
-
engagement metrics
Marketing Performance
enterprise level analytics
Analytics
etl
Data Engineering
etl best practices
Data Engineering
event planning
-
events and sponsorships
-
evolve; evolving, evolved
-
excellent communication skills
Strategic Insights
execute complex analysis to support business functions
Analytics
executive communication
Strategic Insights
executive leadership
-
executive reporting
Analytics
executive/leadership reporting and presentations
Analytics
experience with large data set management
Analytics
experience with marketing industry analytics
Analytics
experimentation strategies
-
experimentation strategy
-
expertise in adobe analytics, google analytics
-
external stakeholder management
-
facebook ads
-
facebook ads manager
-
familiarity with web analytics data
Analytics
feature prioritization
-
feature release management
-
figma
-
financial accountability
-
financial forecasting
Strategic Insights
forecasting
Strategic Insights
forecasting techniques
Strategic Insights
funnel analysis
Analytics
funnel optimization
-
g suite
-
generate standard and ad hoc reporting
Analytics
global marketing efforts
-
go-to-market strategy
-
go-to-market strategy (gtm)
-
goal; goals
-
google ads
Tools & Platforms
google analytics
Analytics
google cloud
Tools & Platforms
google data studio
Analytics
google keyword planner
Tools & Platforms
google search console
Tools & Platforms
google tag manager
Tools & Platforms
graphic design understanding
-
grow; growing, growth
-
growth experiments
-
growth hacking
-
growth marketing
-
growth metrics
Marketing Performance
growth strategies
-
growth strategy
-
haro (help a reporter out)
-
heatmaps
-
help; helping
-
hootsuite
-
hotjar
-
html
-
html/css
-
hubspot
-
hunger for immediate action and quick decision making
Strategic Insights
identify; identifying, identified


impact; impacts
-
implement mmm and mta solutions
-
improve data infrastructure in collaboration with tech teams
Analytics
improve processes
-
improve; improving, improvement, improves, improved


individual team leaders
-
individual; individuals
-
industrial knowledge
-
industry expertise
-
infrastructure;
Data Engineering
initiative; initiatives
-
innovation & growth
-
insight; insights
Strategic Insights
insights and recommendations
Strategic Insights
instagram ads
-
integrated marketing campaigns
Marketing Performance
inter-departmental coordination
-
interact; interacts
-
javascript
-
javascript basics
-
jira
-
job; jobs
-
jquery
-
key business decisions
Strategic Insights
keyword analysis
Analytics
keyword data
Analytics
keyword development
-
keyword discovery
-
keyword gap analysis
Analytics
keyword insights
Strategic Insights
keyword management
-
keyword optimization
-
keyword planner
-
keyword planning
-
keyword rankings
-
keyword research
-
keyword research tools
Tools & Platforms
keyword search
-
keyword strategy
-
keyword tracking
-
keyword tracking tools
Tools & Platforms
keyword-based solutions
-
keyword-driven testing
-
klaviyo
-
knowledge management environment
-
knowledge of digital marketing analytics software
Analytics
knowledge of global marketing efforts
-
knowledge;
-
kpi measurement
Analytics
kpi reports
-
kpi setting
-
kpi tracking
-
kpis
-
landing page optimization
-
large data sets
Analytics
launch plans
-
lead acquisition
Customer Experience
lead analysis
Analytics
lead analytics
Analytics
lead and manage teams of marketing measurement experts
Analytics
lead attribution
-
lead conversion
-
lead conversion metrics
Marketing Performance
lead data analysis
Analytics
lead distribution
-
lead engine
-
lead enrichment
-
lead forecasting
Strategic Insights
lead funnel management
-
lead generation
-
lead generation analysis
Analytics
lead generation campaigns
Marketing Performance
lead generation software
Tools & Platforms
lead generation strategies
-
lead management
-
lead management software
Tools & Platforms
lead nurturing
-
lead quality measurement
Analytics
lead reporting
Analytics
lead scoring
-
lead scoring models
-
lead testing and experimentation in marketing analytics
Analytics
lead tracking
-
lead volume and quality tracking
-
lead volume strategies
-
lead; leading, leadership, led
-
leading insights
Strategic Insights
leverage proprietary tech and third-party tools for client needs
Tools & Platforms
lifetime value (ltv)
Marketing Performance
lifetime value (ltv) modeling
Analytics
linkedin ads
-
machine learning
-
machine learning models
-
mailchimp
-
maintain; maintaining, maintenance
-
make; made
-
manage data processes for marketing measurement
Analytics
manage; managing, managed, manages
-
management & leadership - strategic thinking
-
market access environment
-
market analysis
Analytics
market dynamics
-
market fit
-
market penetration
-
market performance monitoring
Marketing Performance
market positioning
-
market research
-
market segmentation
-
market trends
-
market trends analysis
Analytics
marketing analytics
Analytics
marketing analytics for smbs
Analytics
marketing analytics reporting
Analytics
marketing analytics team
Analytics
marketing analytics tools
Analytics
marketing and public relations
-
marketing attribution models
-
marketing automation
-
marketing automation integration
-
marketing automation software
Tools & Platforms
marketing automation tools
Tools & Platforms
marketing budget management
-
marketing campaign analysis
Analytics
marketing campaign performance
Marketing Performance
marketing campaigns
Marketing Performance
marketing data
Analytics
marketing data analysis
Analytics
marketing data analytics
Analytics
marketing data ecosystem
Analytics
marketing data management
Analytics
marketing data platforms
Analytics
marketing effectiveness
-
marketing funnel analysis
Analytics
marketing initiatives
-
marketing leadership
-
marketing measurement complexities
Analytics
marketing measurement programs
Analytics
marketing measurement technology
Analytics
marketing measurement technology knowledge
Analytics
marketing mix
-
marketing mix modeling
Analytics
marketing performance metrics
Marketing Performance
marketing performance reporting
Analytics
marketing performance tracking
Marketing Performance
marketing principles
-
marketing qualified leads (mql)
-
marketing reporting
Analytics
marketing roadmap
-
marketing roi
Marketing Performance
marketing roi analysis
Analytics
marketing roi maximization
Marketing Performance
marketing strategies
-
marketing strategy
-
marketing strategy development
-
marketing strategy execution
-
marketing strategy insights
Strategic Insights
marketing technology
-
marketing technology stack
-
marketing technology tools
Tools & Platforms
marketing tools
Tools & Platforms
marketing tools and analytics
Analytics
marketing tools and platforms
Tools & Platforms
marketing trends
-
marketing trends analysis
Analytics
marketing trends and data analysis
Analytics
marketing trends and techniques
-
marketing trends understanding
-
marketing;
-
marketo
-
meaningful insight
Strategic Insights
measure; measuring, measurement, measured
-
media landscape
-
media marketing programs
-
media measurement
Analytics
media;
-
meltwater
-
mention
-
mentor team members
-
messaging development
-
meta tags optimization
-
metrics analysis
Analytics
metrics measurement strategy
Analytics
metrics reporting
Analytics
microsoft office 365
-
microsoft power bi
Tools & Platforms
microsoft teams
-
mma/mta attribution models
-
mobile marketing
-
mobile seo
-
model; models, modeling, modeled
Analytics
monday.com
-
mongodb
-
moz
-
muck rack
-
multi-channel analysis
Analytics
multi-channel campaigns
Marketing Performance
multi-channel marketing
-
multiple stakeholders partners
-
multiple teams
-
mysql
Data Engineering
need; needs, requirements, require
-
new marketing solutions
-
new trends
-
node.js
-
numpy
-
off-page optimization
-
offers; offer, offering, offered
-
on-page optimization
-
ongoing reporting
Analytics
online marketing
-
online metrics
Marketing Performance
operational excellence best practices
-
operations process improvement
-
opportunity; opportunities
-
optimizely
-
organic growth acquisition & performance marketing - marketing automation
Marketing Performance
organic traffic growth
-
page speed optimization
-
paid advertising
-
paid media
-
paid search strategy
-
paid social
-
pandas
-
partner; partners, partnering
-
people management
-
perform ad hoc investigations into future improvements or innovations
-
perform analysis leading to insights and action
Analytics
perform; performs, performing, performed
-
performance analysis
Analytics
performance dashboards
Marketing Performance
performance gaps opportunities
Marketing Performance
performance marketing
Marketing Performance
performance metrics
Marketing Performance
performance reporting
Analytics
personalization
-
pipeline development
-
plan; planning
-
position; positions
-
post affiliate pro
-
power bi
Tools & Platforms
ppc
-
ppc (pay-per-click)
-
pr
-
pr newswire
-
predictive analytics
Analytics
predictive modeling
Analytics
pricing strategies
-
problem solving
-
problem-solving
-
problem-solving skills
-
problem; problems
-
process; processes
-
product adoption
-
product adoption strategies
-
product analytics
Analytics
product analytics tools
Analytics
product demos
-
product development process
-
product differentiation
-
product experimentation
-
product knowledge
-
product launch
-
product launch strategy
-
product lifecycle management
-
product market fit
-
product positioning
-
product roadmap
-
product strategy
-
product-led growth
-
proficiency in media test design and analysis
Analytics
programmatic advertising
-
programming for data extraction, transformation, and cleaning
-
programming in r, python, ruby
-
programming;
-
project management
-
project; projects
-
promote best practices in etl processes
Data Engineering
provide; provided, providing
-
public relations
-
python
Data Engineering
python (programming language)
Data Engineering
python for data analysis
Analytics
python/r programming
Data Engineering
qualtrics
-
quantitative analysis
Analytics
quantitative skills
-
queries visualizations
-
r
-
r programming
-
rakuten marketing
-
rank tracking
-
react.js
-
recognize; recognized
-
referral marketing
-
referral programs
-
referralcandy
-
regression analysis
Analytics
relevant experience
Customer Experience
report; reporting, reports
Analytics
reporting
Analytics
reporting & analysis
Analytics
reporting & visualization
Analytics
reporting automation
Analytics
reporting tools
Analytics
reputology
-
request; requests
-
resource allocation
-
responsible designing building
-
retention analysis
Analytics
retention metrics
Marketing Performance
retention strategies
Customer Experience
return on investment (roi)
Marketing Performance
return-on-investment (roi)
Marketing Performance
revenue attribution
-
revenue growth
-
risk management
-
rnage; ranges, ranging
-
roi analysis
Analytics
roi measurement
Analytics
role; roles
-
s3
-
saas understanding
-
sales analysis
Analytics
sales collateral
-
sales enablement
-
sales funnel
-
sales support materials
-
sales training
-
salesforce best practices and functionality
-
salesforce pardot
-
scaling marketing
-
schema markup
-
scikit-learn
-
screaming frog
-
scripting for automation in python or similar languages
Data Engineering
search advertising
-
search engine marketing
-
search engine optimization (seo)
-
segmentation analysis
Analytics
semrush
-
seo
-
seo (search engine optimization)
-
seo audits
-
seo strategies
-
seo strategy
-
seo/sem
-
serve as liaison between business and product/science teams
Strategic Insights
service; services
-
set; sets, setting
-
shell scripting
-
significant value
-
site architecture
-
sketch
-
skill; skills
-
slack
-
slack integration
-
social media
-
social media advertising
-
social media analysis
Analytics
social media analytics
Analytics
social media analytics tools
Analytics
social media campaigns
Marketing Performance
social media content creation
-
social media content strategy
-
social media engagement
-
social media insights
Strategic Insights
social media integration
-
social media management
-
social media marketing
-
social media metrics
Marketing Performance
social media monitoring
-
social media optimization
-
social media performance measurement
Analytics
social media platforms
Tools & Platforms
social media reporting
Analytics
social media strategy
-
social media tools
Tools & Platforms
social media trends
-
socialbee
-
solution; solutions
-
sprout social
-
spyfu
-
sql
Data Engineering
sql and query writing
Data Engineering
sql with 5+ years of experience
Data Engineering
sqlite
Data Engineering
stakeholder engagement
-
stakeholder management
-
statistical analytics
Analytics
statistical data analysis
Analytics
statistical modeling
Analytics
statistics
-
storytelling
-
storytelling with data
Analytics
strategic internal initiatives
-
strategic planning
-
strategic planning process
-
strategy; strategies, strategic
-
strong collaboration with multiple stakeholders
-
structure; structured
-
structured problem-solving approach
-
structured thinking
-
support business development and refine scopes of work
Strategic Insights
support central bi team in reporting on global marketing efforts
Analytics
support; supporting, supports
-
surveymonkey
-
synthesis modeling
Analytics
tableau
Tools & Platforms
tag management
-
talent development
-
target audience
-
team building
-
team collaboration
-
team coordination
-
team leadership
-
team mentoring
-
team; teams
-
technical documentation
-
technical documentation skills
-
technical expertise
-
technical seo
-
technical skills
-
technical skills - aws
-
technology integration
-
think; thinking, thought


timeline coordination
-
tools & utilities - marketo
Tools & Platforms
traffic analysis
Analytics
trello
-
trend analysis
Analytics
twitter ads
-
typeform
-
understand; understanding
-
understanding of mmm (media mix modeling)
Analytics
understanding of mta (multi-touch attribution)
-
useful reporting views
Analytics
user acquisition strategy
Customer Experience
user acquisition, activation, and retention
Customer Experience
user behavior analysis
Analytics
user engagement
Customer Experience
user experience (ux)
Customer Experience
user feedback
Customer Experience
user funnel analysis
Analytics
user growth
Customer Experience
user insights
Strategic Insights
user journey mapping
Customer Experience
user onboarding
Customer Experience
user personas
Customer Experience
user retargeting
Customer Experience
user retention
Customer Experience
user retention strategies
Customer Experience
user testing
Customer Experience
value proposition
-
viral marketing
-
vision & leadership
-
visual design principles
-
visual design understanding
-
visualization tools
Tools & Platforms
voice of the customer
-
vwo (visual website optimizer)
-
web analytics
Analytics
web content strategy
-
web marketing strategy
-
web strategy
-
web technologies
-
webinars
-
website architecture
-
website management
-
website optimization
-
website strategy
-
website traffic growth
-
world class team
-
written communication
Strategic Insights
yoast seo
-
zapier
-
zoom
-




Keyword
Category
Subcategory
Score
metrics analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
0
reporting automation
Analytics
Data Visualization
30
business analytics and intelligence
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
communication
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
data analytics
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
data gathering and manipulation
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
50
mma/mta attribution models
Analytics
Attribution Models
0
media measurement
Analytics
Attribution Models
0
lifetime value (ltv)
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
0
return-on-investment (roi)
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
20
cost-per-acquisition (cpa)
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
0
customer acquisition cost (cac)
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
0
user acquisition, activation, and retention
Marketing Performance
User Acquisition
0
etl
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
0
data integrity
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
50
sql
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
data processes
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
50
automated reporting dashboards
Analytics
Data Visualization
30
key business decisions
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
marketing performance reporting
Marketing Performance
Campaign Analysis
30
campaign analysis
Marketing Performance
Campaign Analysis
0
campaign attribution
Analytics
Attribution Models
0
forecasting techniques
Strategic Insights
Forecasting
0
data visualization
Analytics
Data Visualization
80
sql and query writing
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
python/r programming
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
performance dashboards
Analytics
Data Visualization
0
marketing roi analysis
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
20
marketing roi analysis
Marketing Performance
Campaign Analysis
20
customer retention analysis
Marketing Performance
User Acquisition
0
predictive modeling
Strategic Insights
Forecasting
0
data visualization tools
Analytics
Data Visualization
80
power bi
Analytics
Data Visualization
0
python for data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
python for data analysis
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
50
bigquery
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
cross-functional communication
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
churn rate
Marketing Performance
User Acquisition
0
roi analysis
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
20
marketing roi
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
20
marketing roi
Marketing Performance
Campaign Analysis
20
communications strategy
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
executive communication
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
return on investment (roi)
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
20
user acquisition strategy
Marketing Performance
User Acquisition
0
retention analysis
Marketing Performance
User Acquisition
0
communication strategies
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
roi measurement
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
20
tableau
Analytics
Data Visualization
0
microsoft power bi
Analytics
Data Visualization
0
etl best practices
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
0
create automated reporting and dashboards
Analytics
Data Visualization
30
promote best practices in etl processes
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
0
manage data processes for marketing measurement
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
50
data integrity and validation
Data Engineering
Data Infrastructure
50
communication of insights and recommendations
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
excellent communication skills
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
sql with 5+ years of experience
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
scripting for automation in python or similar languages
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
advanced sql skills
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
programming in r, python, ruby, or similar languages
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
data analysis and reporting
Analytics
Data Analysis
80
written communication
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
marketing data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
statistical data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
python
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
python (programming language)
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
analytics engineering & management - customer acquisition cost (cac) optimization
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
50
executive reporting
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
30
lifetime value (ltv) modeling
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
0
sqlite
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
mysql
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
advanced data analytics
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
data visualization and reporting tools tableau power bi
Analytics
Data Visualization
80
lead data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
marketing campaign analysis
Marketing Performance
Campaign Analysis
0
marketing data analytics
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
marketing trends and data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
ability to write complex sql queries
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
ability to write sql
Data Engineering
Tools & Platforms
0
data analysis techniques
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
marketing roi maximization
Marketing Performance
Metrics & KPIs
20
marketing roi maximization
Marketing Performance
Campaign Analysis
20
data visualization approaches
Analytics
Data Visualization
80
big data analytics
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
client data analysis
Analytics
Data Analysis
50
communication skills
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
communication and presentation skills
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
collaboration and communication
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
communication strategy
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0
communication tools
Strategic Insights
Business Reporting
0




keyword
cluster
score
metrics analysis
5
30.13
reporting automation
4
4.62
business analytics and intelligence
4
3.88
executive/leadership reporting and presentations
4
1.53
communication
4
1.32
insights and recommendations
4
1.66
world class team
4
0.61
cross-functional
4
0.92
team collaboration
4
1.24
data analytics
1
34.6
data gathering and manipulation
1
18.14
mma/mta attribution models
4
0.81
marketing measurement programs
2
18.48
marketing measurement technology
2
20.89
marketing measurement complexities
2
16.44
marketing analytics
2
30.3
marketing data
1
38.2
media measurement
6
37.15
metrics measurement strategy
4
5.78
lifetime value (ltv)
4
2.13
return-on-investment (roi)
4
1.46
cost-per-acquisition (cpa)
4
4.91
customer acquisition cost (cac)
7
27.36
scaling marketing
2
18.58
media marketing programs
2
28.3
marketing strategy
2
27.7
user acquisition, activation, and retention
4
7.64
designing and measuring testing experiments
4
0.79
customer centric organizations
7
24.59
data infrastructure and integration
1
21.97
etl
4
0.34
data integrity
1
24.03
designing, building, scaling, and maintaining
4
0.61
sql
4
0.62
adhoc investigations
4
0.27
strategic planning process
4
1.16
structured thinking
4
0.92
technical documentation
4
0.67
business functions
4
2.49
synthesis modeling
4
0.98
complex analysis
5
26.85
data processes
1
25.59
business trends
4
4.03
ongoing reporting
4
1.39
automated reporting dashboards
4
1.35
new marketing solutions
2
14.85
performance gaps opportunities
4
1.93
areas improvement
4
0.27
business decisions
4
2.49
business questions
4
2.33
business stakeholders
4
2.59
queries visualizations
4
0.22
problem solving
4
0.75
significant value
4
1.18
knowledge management environment
3
21.48
global marketing efforts
2
16.3
central bi team
4
1.14
enterprise level analytics
4
2.24
key business decisions
4
1.91
technical expertise
4
0.66
marketing analytics team
2
22.15
strategic internal initiatives
4
0.75
drive strategy
4
2.89
marketing initiatives
2
20.15
relevant experience
4
4.66
responsible designing building
4
0.6
developing measurement strategies
4
2.33
demand trust transparency
4
0.35
useful reporting views
4
1.06
challenging problems
4
0.25
ad hoc investigations
4
0.59
best practices
4
0.61
analytical statistical rigor
4
0.74
multiple teams
4
2.45
multiple stakeholders partners
4
0.59
improve processes
4
2.48
individual team leaders
4
0.75
meaningful insight
4
0.26
large data sets
1
17.79
leading insights
4
1.75
data analysis
5
41.31
marketing strategy insights
2
20.5
marketing performance reporting
2
22.28
campaign analysis
5
31.78
campaign attribution
4
3.68
marketing mix modeling
2
16.45
channel performance
4
4.66
segmentation analysis
5
26.8
multi-channel analysis
5
23.4
lead analysis
5
34.88
budget analysis
5
26.17
revenue attribution
4
0.9
predictive analytics
4
3.1
descriptive analytics
4
2.97
machine learning models
4
0.84
forecasting techniques
4
1
data visualization
1
27.92
dashboard creation
4
1.72
storytelling with data
1
25.1
visualization tools
4
5.82
business intelligence tools
4
3.07
sql and query writing
4
1.19
data warehousing
1
22.02
python/r programming
4
0.93
advanced excel
4
0.98
digital marketing tools
2
24.53
google analytics
4
4.41
marketing automation tools
2
22.09
performance dashboards
4
2.61
marketing roi analysis
5
28.58
customer experience analysis
7
37.57
customer retention analysis
7
39.86
experimentation strategies
4
2.94
customer lifetime value (clv)
7
22.65
user behavior analysis
5
23.56
user journey mapping
4
6.33
predictive modeling
4
1.02
funnel analysis
5
29.99
digital marketing analytics
2
25.67
cross-channel analysis
5
24.51
customer retention metrics
7
34.7
lead attribution
4
3.28
engagement metrics
4
3.62
experimentation strategy
4
5.02
reporting & visualization
4
4.3
data storytelling
1
25.1
dashboard development
8
17.31
data visualization tools
1
25.12
adobe analytics
4
3.28
power bi
4
1.93
python for data analysis
5
28.3
r programming
4
0.82
bigquery
4
0.16
database management
3
23.83
marketing automation integration
2
18.91
cross-functional communication
4
1.49
funnel optimization
4
3.15
churn rate
4
1.11
product analytics
8
29.48
behavioral analysis
5
24.35
customer retention strategies
7
35.3
acquisition channels
4
3.7
organic traffic growth
4
1
referral programs
4
1.87
personalization
4
0.16
revenue growth
4
0.98
viral marketing
2
17.77
creative testing
4
0.86
product adoption
8
24.4
api integrations
4
0.43
vision & leadership
4
0.78
business growth
4
4.05
brand strategy
4
5.02
executive leadership
4
0.86
go-to-market strategy (gtm)
4
3.14
cross-functional leadership
4
1.12
market penetration
4
1.42
business development
8
20.8
people management
3
23.83
coaching & mentoring
4
0.25
talent development
8
16.5
collaboration with sales
4
1.09
inter-departmental coordination
4
0.35
stakeholder engagement
4
2.65
change management
3
23.83
roi analysis
5
29.37
kpi setting
4
0.8
marketing roi
2
21.47
marketing effectiveness
2
17.77
market analysis
5
31.68
financial forecasting
4
0.6
cost optimization
4
3.45
risk management
3
23.83
financial accountability
4
0.25
market trends
4
4.35
industry expertise
4
0.54
consumer behavior
4
2.55
brand positioning
4
3.39
brand building
4
1.56
creative direction
4
0.39
communications strategy
4
2.68
digital transformation
4
3.27
innovation & growth
4
0.95
digital strategy
4
6.41
technology integration
4
4.34
product launch
8
24.94
product strategy
8
30.19
customer experience (cx)
7
29.43
integrated marketing campaigns
2
15.68
acquisition & retention strategies
4
10.55
executive communication
4
1.28
public relations
4
1.08
external stakeholder management
3
20.9
crisis management
3
23.83
demand generation strategy
4
2.35
pipeline development
8
16.5
marketing qualified leads (mql)
2
11.36
account-based marketing (abm)
2
15.01
multi-channel campaigns
4
3.18
paid advertising
4
7.12
webinars
4
0.16
events and sponsorships
4
0.16
content syndication
3
12.37
content marketing
2
23.35
sales funnel
4
3.95
lead nurturing
4
2.28
sales enablement
4
0.89
alignment with sales teams
4
4.68
lead scoring
4
2.38
crm integration
4
1.78
lead conversion metrics
4
2.49
attribution modeling
4
1.15
return on investment (roi)
4
1.46
conversion rate optimization
4
1.37
content development
8
19.36
brand messaging
4
3.36
retention strategies
4
8.77
account management
3
25.41
user acquisition strategy
4
3.78
campaign planning
4
2.52
market positioning
4
2.98
content strategy
3
17
demand generation
4
0.84
digital marketing
2
27.03
event planning
4
0.53
marketing automation
2
23.32
brand awareness
4
1.4
cross-functional collaboration
4
1.16
team leadership
4
1.53
project management
3
24.73
customer relationship management
7
29.31
user engagement
4
2.18
customer retention
7
41.59
market performance monitoring
4
2.66
budget management
3
27.04
resource allocation
4
0.16
team coordination
4
1.01
graphic design understanding
4
0.69
brand consistency
4
1.4
technical skills
4
1.25
crm tools
4
2.9
marketing automation software
2
18.1
digital channels
4
3.27
website strategy
4
4.05
on-page optimization, onpage optimization
4
1.46
off-page optimization, offpage optimization
4
1.46
keyword research
4
1.4
content optimization
3
14.76
link building, backlink building
4
0.68
backlink analysis
5
25.38
competitor analysis
5
24.35
seo audits
4
0.77
site architecture
4
0.25
crawlability
4
0.16
mobile seo
4
0.8
page speed optimization
4
1.01
core web vitals
4
0.82
schema markup
4
0.16
meta tags optimization
4
0.88
google search console
4
0.78
rank tracking
4
0.52
digital marketing integration
2
20.85
algorithm updates
4
0.16
market trends analysis
5
26.24
strategic planning
4
0.96
growth marketing
2
23.17
user growth
4
1.86
paid media
6
36.24
digital advertising
4
3.72
campaign optimization
4
2.8
conversion rate optimization (cro)
4
1.17
user funnel analysis
5
25.59
paid social
6
34.62
display advertising
4
1.36
programmatic advertising
4
1.36
app install campaigns
4
1.23
affiliate marketing
2
19.72
user retargeting
4
1.13
multi-channel marketing
2
16.89
performance metrics
4
3.5
cohort analysis
5
24.35
retention analysis
5
29.59
user experience (ux)
4
4.1
user feedback
4
4.59
user retention strategies
4
7.24
mobile marketing
2
18.58
user insights
4
1.98
customer feedback analysis
7
34.45
app store optimization (aso)
4
0.85
digital marketing strategy
2
23.96
website optimization
4
2.67
web content strategy
3
13.79
seo (search engine optimization)
4
1.72
content management system (cms)
3
35.22
web analytics
4
4.33
traffic analysis
5
26.17
landing page optimization
4
1.01
website traffic growth
4
1.16
social media integration
6
54.34
website architecture
4
1.31
website management
3
27.18
web technologies
4
1.04
html/css
4
0.4
javascript basics
4
0.28
technical seo
4
1.22
visual design principles
4
0.64
heatmaps
4
0.16
tag management
3
24.73
marketing funnel analysis
5
29.2
content calendar management
3
29.9
performance reporting
4
4.95
app integration
4
1.78
seo strategy
4
3.24
product-led growth
8
19.85
product market fit
8
19.9
growth experiments
4
1.01
user retention
4
7.3
activation metrics
4
1.39
user onboarding
4
1.13
churn analysis
5
25.38
alignment with product teams
8
22.52
growth metrics
4
1.58
product analytics tools
8
24.97
voice of the customer
7
30.81
product roadmap
8
22.6
feature prioritization
4
1.08
product experimentation
8
23.57
api integration
4
1.81
growth hacking
4
0.95
market research
4
1.55
competitive analysis
5
25.38
customer insights
7
37.15
market segmentation
4
3.56
target audience
4
0.88
trend analysis
5
24.35
user personas
4
1.13
go-to-market strategy
4
4.65
product positioning
8
23.14
product differentiation
8
21.88
product lifecycle management
8
20.06
value proposition
4
1.18
market fit
4
2.72
marketing campaigns
2
22.44
messaging development
8
16.96
content creation
3
13
branding
4
0.16
storytelling
4
3.35
communication strategies
4
1.89
sales collateral
4
0.89
sales training
4
0.93
product demos
8
21.88
lead generation
4
3.06
sales support materials
4
1.15
customer journey mapping
7
29.72
seo/sem
4
0.77
social media marketing
6
63.03
email marketing
2
19.36
ppc (pay-per-click)
4
0.26
performance marketing
2
25.8
analytics and reporting
4
6.03
stakeholder management
3
27.21
cross-functional teams
4
2.05
alignment with product development
8
33.93
coordination with sales
4
0.97
product launch strategy
8
24.54
launch plans
4
3.18
feature release management
3
19.16
timeline coordination
4
0.39
marketing roadmap
2
18.58
kpi tracking
4
0.87
roi measurement
4
3.21
customer acquisition
7
38.2
retention metrics
4
8.67
a/b testing
4
0.79
data-driven decision-making
1
20.9
customer experience
7
38.82
customer feedback
7
34.97
user testing
4
1.52
customer success stories
7
24.59
product adoption strategies
8
21.8
product knowledge
8
24.52
saas understanding
4
0.5
api familiarity
4
0.87
product development process
8
33.62
copywriting
4
0.16
visual design understanding
4
0.82
creative thinking
4
0.93
brand development
8
18.48
growth strategy
4
4.64
hubspot
4
0.16
marketo
4
0.27
salesforce pardot
4
0.22
mailchimp
4
0.16
activecampaign
4
0.16
klaviyo
4
0.16
google data studio
1
18.53
tableau
4
0.9
microsoft power bi
4
1.55
semrush
4
0.16
ahrefs
4
0.16
moz
4
0.16
screaming frog
4
0.16
google keyword planner
4
1.34
yoast seo
4
0.77
brightedge
4
0.16
spyfu
4
0.16
google ads
4
1.03
bing ads
4
0.55
facebook ads manager
4
0.63
linkedin ads
4
0.55
twitter ads
4
0.55
instagram ads
4
0.55
hootsuite
4
0.16
buffer
4
0.16
sprout social
6
28.02
socialbee
4
0.16
clickmeter
4
0.16
post affiliate pro
4
1.09
cj affiliate
4
1.36
rakuten marketing
2
17.77
awin
4
0.16
referralcandy
4
0.16
buzzstream
4
0.16
muck rack
4
0.16
cision
4
0.16
pr newswire
4
0.28
haro (help a reporter out)
4
0.23
brand24
4
0.16
mention
4
0.16
brandwatch
4
0.16
reputology
4
0.16
canva
4
0.16
adobe creative cloud
4
0.74
figma
4
0.16
sketch
4
0.16
asana
4
0.16
trello
4
0.16
monday.com
4
0.16
jira
4
0.16
slack
4
0.29
microsoft teams
4
2.36
zoom
4
0.16
zapier
4
0.16
google tag manager
4
1.3
optimizely
4
0.16
vwo (visual website optimizer)
4
0.87
hotjar
4
0.16
crazy egg
4
0.16
surveymonkey
4
0.16
qualtrics
4
0.16
typeform
4
0.16
slack integration
4
1.73
g suite
4
0.16
microsoft office 365
4
0.29
dropbox
4
0.16
team; teams
4
2.66
marketing;
2
41.52
data;
1
45.07
business;
4
4.15
measure; measuring, measurement, measured
4
1.71
solution; solutions
4
0.45
drive; driving, driven
4
3.31
analytics;
4
6.02
help; helping
4
0.23
support; supporting, supports
4
0.64
strategy; strategies, strategic
4
3.44
report; reporting, reports
4
1.32
partner; partners, partnering
4
0.22
provide; provided, providing
4
0.16
develop; developing, developed, development
8
12.63
design; designing
4
0.64
programming;
4
0.82
lead; leading
4
2.67
role; roles
4
0.16
lead; leading, leadership, led
4
2.26
media;
6
51.6
analysis; analyses, analyzing, analyzed
5
15.91
manage; managing, managed, manages
4
0.48
action; actions
4
0.57
customer; customers
7
30.81
skill; skills
4
0.78
rnage; ranges, ranging
4
0.16
position; positions
4
0.16
grow; growing, growth
4
0.73
process; processes
4
1.93
need; needs, requirements, require
4
1.44
job; jobs
4
0.16
perform; performs, performing, performed
4
0.42
decision; decisions
4
1.41
initiative; initiatives
4
0.65
base; based
4
0.86
opportunity; opportunities
4
0.23
structure; structured
4
0.3
service; services
4
0.79
make; made
4
0.16
automate; automated, automating
4
0.32
problem; problems
4
0.56
infrastructure;
4
3.08
efforts;
4
1.83
advertising;
4
2.25
set; sets, setting
4
0.78
offers; offer, offering, offered
4
0.16
build; building, built
4
0.58
consult; consulting, cosulted
4
0.2
recognize; recognized
4
0.16
understand; understanding
4
0.5
model; models, modeling, modeled
4
1.42
plan; planning
4
0.53
think; thinking, thought
4
0.7
request; requests
4
0.16
connect; connecting
4
0.71
improve; improving, improvement, improves, improved
4
0.37
project; projects
4
1.5
individual; individuals
4
0.23
interact; interacts
4
0.16
goal; goals
4
0.71
insight; insights
4
1.66
maintain; maintaining, maintenance
4
0.55
impact; impacts
4
0.16
evolve; evolving, evolved
4
0.16
ad hoc;
4
0.54
identify; identifying, identified
4
0.16
knowledge;
4
2.41
amazon advertising and e-commerce
4
1.09
digital advertising solutions
4
3.34
marketing analytics for smbs
2
18.45
data/bi space
1
18.65
knowledge of global marketing efforts
2
14.89
etl best practices
4
0.69
marketing measurement technology knowledge
2
18.19
understanding of mmm (media mix modeling)
4
17.41
understanding of mta (multi-touch attribution)
4
1.1
proficiency in media test design and analysis
5
17.86
experience with large data set management
3
17.81
familiarity with web analytics data
1
19.83
knowledge of digital marketing analytics software
2
18.41
ability to connect marketing data with business goals
1
16.87
design, build, and maintain data infrastructure
1
15.24
create automated reporting and dashboards
4
1.15
design and measure experiments
4
0.58
execute complex analysis to support business functions
5
15.6
develop scaled, automated, user-friendly systems
4
0.83
consult with cross-functional teams to develop kpis and automated reporting solutions
4
1.65
improve data infrastructure in collaboration with tech teams
1
14.44
support central bi team in reporting on global marketing efforts
2
11.38
promote best practices in etl processes
4
1.14
mentor team members
4
0.61
serve as liaison between business and product/science teams
8
16.65
perform ad hoc investigations into future improvements or innovations
4
0.49
lead and manage teams of marketing measurement experts
2
12.22
develop measurement strategies for clients
4
1.92
manage data processes for marketing measurement
1
19.04
implement mmm and mta solutions
4
0.45
lead testing and experimentation in marketing analytics
2
15.49
generate standard and ad hoc reporting
4
1.05
perform analysis leading to insights and action
5
16.27
leverage proprietary tech and third-party tools for client needs
4
1.57
collaborate with internal data science, client services, media activation, and product teams
8
13.52
direct interaction with key client stakeholders across media, finance, and analytics
4
13.75
drive internal strategic initiatives and problem solving
4
0.96
support business development and refine scopes of work
8
12.22
communicate with executive leaders and stakeholders
4
0.66
ability to translate between data and business needs
1
15.74
communicating results to senior leadership
4
0.52
analytical and statistical rigor in decision-making
4
1.84
operational excellence best practices
4
0.49
data integrity and validation
1
18.47
technical documentation skills
4
1.17
problem-solving skills
4
1.24
communication of insights and recommendations
4
1.41
excellent communication skills
4
1.33
strong collaboration with multiple stakeholders
4
0.79
ability to thrive in ambiguous situations
4
0.68
action-oriented decision making
4
1.99
hunger for immediate action and quick decision making
4
1.56
structured problem-solving approach
4
0.7
cultural adaptability and ability to foster a supportive environment
4
0.69
sql with 5+ years of experience
4
3.92
programming for data extraction, transformation, and cleaning
1
14.3
scripting for automation in python or similar languages
4
1.54
advanced sql skills
4
1.18
statistical analytics
4
3.35
programming in r, python, ruby, or similar languages
4
0.66
experience with marketing industry analytics
2
16.15
data analysis and reporting
5
33.11
expertise in adobe analytics, google analytics, or similar tools
4
4.64
written communication
4
0.89
marketing data analysis
5
37.66
online metrics
4
1.35
demand forecasting
4
0.75
growth strategies
4
2.29
web marketing strategy
2
19.3
paid search strategy
4
6.47
analytics
4
6.02
search engine optimization (seo)
4
1.72
data modeling
1
26.15
online marketing
2
18.58
statistical data analysis
5
27.92
conversion optimization
4
1.54
python
4
1.32
search advertising
4
1.54
web strategy
4
3.77
python (programming language)
4
0.71
reporting & analysis
5
34.03
new trends
4
2.28
team building
4
1.15
management & leadership - strategic thinking
3
18.91
operations process improvement
4
1.05
critical thinking
4
0.86
team mentoring
4
0.83
analytics engineering & management - customer acquisition cost (cac) optimization
7
23.13
kpi reports
4
0.88
statistical modeling
4
1.08
marketing reporting
2
26.39
executive reporting
4
1.63
cross-functional initiatives
4
1.02
data models
1
25.5
data mining
1
22.02
audience segmentation
4
2.26
lifetime value (ltv) modeling
4
1.91
machine learning
4
0.31
customer journey analysis
7
36.56
data processing
1
22.02
channel mix optimization
4
2.56
causal inference
4
0.16
regression analysis
5
24.35
analytical modelling
4
0.46
conversation analysis
5
24.35
organic growth acquisition & performance marketing - marketing automation
2
22.61
marketing leadership
2
21.47
marketing mix
2
20.42
marketing budget management
3
25.84
conversion testing
4
1.03
competitive
4
1.54
analysis
5
49.99
affiliate management
3
25.96
pr
4
0.28
content management
3
42.57
search engine marketing
2
15.51
referral marketing
2
18.58
technical skills - aws
4
1
google cloud
4
1.59
airflow
4
0.16
docker
4
0.16
jquery
4
0.16
s3
4
0.16
api
4
0.51
scikit-learn
4
0.16
react.js
4
0.24
angular
4
0.16
sqlite
4
0.16
pandas
4
0.16
numpy
4
0.16
bash
4
0.16
css
4
0.28
node.js
4
0.24
html
4
0.28
mongodb
4
0.16
amazon redshift
4
0.23
javascript
4
0.28
mysql
4
0.16
shell scripting
4
0.22
tools & utilities - marketo
4
2.11
meltwater
4
0.16
facebook ads
4
0.64
analytic skills
4
0.78
analyze marketing data
1
24.53
data collection and sorting
1
17.01
advanced data analytics
1
23.88
crm
4
0.43
forecasting
4
0.64
industrial knowledge
4
1.51
social media analytics
6
60.56
statistics
4
0.16
analytical thinking
4
0.96
analytics tools
4
7.79
analyze and interpret data
1
18.39
digital marketing technology familiarity
2
18.13
quantitative analysis
5
25.38
analytical capabilities
4
0.46
digital analytics software google analytics adobe analytics
4
6.53
data visualization and reporting tools tableau power bi
1
16.11
digital analytics
4
8.09
marketing data platforms
1
28.26
business analysis
5
31.9
ab testing
4
0.59
quantitative skills
4
1.21
data management
3
35.22
data insights
1
28.54
business insights
4
2.99
campaign kpi analysis
5
23.99
advanced analytics
4
4.47
problem-solving
4
0.75
marketing attribution models
2
16.49
r
4
0
data governance
1
22.02
keyword analysis
5
32.33
keyword strategy
4
5.08
keyword optimization
4
2.56
keyword tracking
4
1.46
keyword planner
4
1.33
keyword management
3
29.99
keyword insights
4
3.02
keyword development
8
19.5
keyword discovery
4
1.27
keyword rankings
4
1.27
keyword planning
4
1.45
keyword research tools
4
2.52
keyword tracking tools
4
3.13
keyword gap analysis
5
21.92
keyword search
4
1.46
keyword data
1
28.52
keyword-based solutions
4
1.25
keyword-driven testing
4
4.74
lead generation analysis
5
25.47
lead generation campaigns
4
2.41
lead generation strategies
4
2.53
lead management
3
33.19
lead tracking
4
2.64
lead data analysis
5
33.8
marketing performance metrics
2
19.88
marketing analytics tools
2
26.13
marketing analytics reporting
2
24.74
marketing campaign analysis
5
30.55
marketing campaign performance
2
19.77
marketing data analytics
1
33.1
lead analytics
4
4.71
lead acquisition
4
4.59
marketing strategy development
8
20.85
marketing performance tracking
2
19.05
marketing strategy execution
2
17.75
marketing data management
3
31.7
lead management software
3
24.75
lead conversion
4
2.61
lead funnel management
3
25.02
lead generation software
4
3.16
lead volume strategies
4
2.03
lead reporting
4
4.16
lead forecasting
4
2.56
lead quality measurement
4
2.34
lead volume and quality tracking
4
1.6
marketing tools
2
28.01
lead distribution
4
2.28
lead enrichment
4
2.28
lead scoring models
4
1.93
marketing technology
2
24
marketing technology stack
2
16.86
marketing technology tools
2
22.65
marketing trends analysis
5
30.01
marketing tools and analytics
2
26.13
marketing tools and platforms
2
20.33
marketing trends
2
22.96
marketing trends and techniques
2
16.61
marketing trends and data analysis
5
30.49
marketing trends understanding
2
17.6
lead engine
4
2.51
marketing strategies
2
23.88
data-driven decision making
1
20.9
campaign performance
4
4.47
customer engagement
7
35.2
metrics reporting
4
2.94
business intelligence
4
2.49
consumer insights
4
1.8
reporting
4
2.65
customer segmentation
7
33.37
campaign management
3
28.54
seo
4
1.09
kpi measurement
4
2.82
social media management
6
59.13
social media platforms
6
53.98
social media content creation
6
45.98
social media strategy
6
60.02
social media campaigns
6
53.58
social media advertising
6
54.34
social media engagement
6
53.58
social media analytics tools
6
53.89
social media analysis
6
61.07
social media content strategy
6
52.37
social media performance measurement
6
49.77
social media insights
6
55.78
social media tools
6
58.98
social media trends
6
54.34
social media monitoring
6
49.57
social media optimization
6
57.01
social media reporting
6
58.35
social media metrics
6
55.26
abm account based marketing
2
15.01
abm marketing
2
23.96
ability to write and publish analytical reports
4
1.69
abm frameworks
4
1.63
able to independently prioritize work assignments meet deadlines and manage multiple projects
4
0.53
abm content strategy
3
14.22
abm digital ad and reporting platforms
4
4.93
abm campaigns
4
3.66
abm execution
4
2.4
abm programs
4
3.07
abm strategies
4
3.1
abm strategy
4
4.29
ability to write complex sql queries
4
1.51
ability to write sql
4
1.99
abm platforms
4
3.05
abm marketing campaigns
2
19.23
able to think critically and demonstrate logical reasoning
4
0.32
ability to write and present documentation
4
1.43
ability to write clear and concise reports
4
1.41
able to work independently and as part of a team
4
0.87
able to work both independently and in a teamoriented collaborative environment
4
0.68
ability to see past the numbers
4
0.77
ability to write effective reports and presentations
4
1.52
ability to write reports and procedure manuals
4
1.41
ability to write excel functions
4
1.47
ability to write and edit professional presentations in a variety of multimedia formats
4
1.03
ability to write and communicate clearly
4
1.42
ability to write clearly and effectively
4
1.34
able to handle multiple tasks
4
0.47
able to draw conclusions
4
0.33
ability to write routine reports
4
1.63
ability to write content in a variety of styles and tones
4
6.32
ability to write code
4
1.52
ability to write and design process maps
4
1.6
ability to write and deliver training
4
1.36
ability to write policies and procedures
4
1.27
ability to write correspondence
4
1.72
ability to write for publication
4
1.52
ability to write cyber investigative reports
4
1.41
ability to write professional correspondence
4
1.48
ability to write simple correspondence
4
1.42
digital and direct marketing tactics
2
14.71
data analysis techniques
5
26.96
marketing data ecosystem
1
22.71
data extraction manipulation analytics
1
19.97
marketing roi maximization
2
15.15
customer and market dynamics
7
27.84
b2b purchase process
4
1.03
data visualization approaches
1
20.43
email marketing strategies
2
17.05
pricing strategies
4
1.2
market dynamics
4
3.26
marketing and public relations
2
14.11
customer requirements
7
32.71
advertising
4
2.25
earned and paid media
6
27.8
digital retail landscape
4
2.49
market access environment
4
1.17
marketing principles
2
18.58
consumer market
4
2.43
media landscape
6
30.38
salesforce best practices and functionality
4
0.55
audience analytics
4
3.6
audience insights
4
1.89
audience analysis
5
29.29
audience targeting
4
0.88
attribution models
4
1.19
big data analytics
1
23.99
attribution analysis
5
29.59
audience measurement
4
2.99
audience engagement
4
2.08
brand marketing
2
21.47
brand management
3
27.79
big data platforms
1
21.89
b2c marketing
2
17.77
b2b marketing
2
18.58
attribution strategy
4
3.27
attribution reporting
4
2.69
audience strategy
4
3.24
audience understanding
4
1.18
performance analysis
5
31.72
campaign analytics
4
4.27
client data analysis
5
28.3
channel strategy
4
3.99
channel marketing
2
22.97
channel analysis
5
31.08
campaign strategy
4
4.09
campaign reporting
4
4.49
client relationship management
3
20.47
client engagement
4
2
reporting tools
4
5.47
sales analysis
5
28.97
cloud data warehouse
1
18.04
cloud analytics
4
4.29
cloud platforms
4
3.68
communication skills
4
1.74
collaboration and teamwork
4
0.55
collaborative
4
0.47
collaborative skills
4
1.1
communication and presentation skills
4
1.33
collaborate
4
1.1
collaboration and communication
4
1.43
collaborate with crossfunctional teams
4
2.44
content writing
3
12.73
consumer marketing
2
20.53
consumer research
4
0.75
communication strategy
4
3.3
cms reporting
4
2.4
cms optimization
4
3.08
communication tools
4
3.29
collaboration and stakeholder engagement
4
2.2
cms wordpress
4
1.55
collaborative environment
4
1.13
cms tools wordpress
4
2.39
content management system
3
42.57
content management systems
3
31.34
consumer behavior analysis
5
21.82
content performance analysis
5
25.6
cms publishing tools
4
2.32
cms platform
4
2.69
cms or dam platform management
3
18.27
cms platforms
4
3.1
cms systems
4
2.99
cms tools
4
3.39
cms website
4
3.23
cms rules and regulations
4
1.15
cms requirements
4
2.4
cms policy
4
1.49
cms programs
4
1.65
data-driven insights
1
25.35
customer analytics
7
41.54
data-driven marketing
1
29.48
dashboard reporting
4
2.01
data strategy
1
30.65
data platforms
1
28.3
data tools
1
30.81
seo strategies
4
1.72
ecommerce
4
0.16
data-driven
1
29.57
social media
6
69.68
data integration
1
27.39
customer journey
7
37.39
kpis
4
0.23
dashboarding
4
0.16
cross-channel marketing
2
17.75
ppc
4
0.26




Single-Word Keywords
Marketing (≈60)


Data (≈45)


Analytics (≈20)


Performance (≈20)


Reporting (≈15)


Campaign (≈15)


Analysis (≈15)


Insights (≈12)


Testing (≈12)


Channel (≈12)


Paid (≈12)


Media (≈10)


SQL (≈10)


Strategy (≈10)


Customer (≈20)


Budget (≈9)


Engagement (≈10)


Attribution (≈5)


Conversion (≈5)


Optimization (≈6)


Tableau (≈8)


Growth (≈6)


KPIs (≈8)


Experience (≈12)


Insights (≈12) (already listed at #8, but leaving to show the frequency)
Two-to-Three-Word Phrases
Marketing analytics (≈15)


Marketing campaign (≈12)


A/B testing (≈10)


Paid media (≈8)


Channel performance (≈8)


Multivariate testing (≈5)


Customer acquisition (≈6)


Data-driven insights (≈6)


Marketing strategy (≈8)


Cross-functional team (≈4)


Media budgets (≈5)


Financial budget management (≈5)


Conversion rate (≈5)


Key performance indicators (≈5)


Growth and engagement (≈4)


SQL queries (≈4)


Lead scoring (≈2)


Predictive analytics (≈3)


Multi-touch attribution (≈3)


Stakeholder presentations (≈3)


Organic search (≈3)


Campaign performance (≈6)


Strategic decisions (≈3)


Segment our prospect (≈2)


Marketing mix modeling (≈2)
Skills (10–20)
Below are skills frequently mentioned or implied in the text. Some are technical, others are soft skills relevant to the roles:
Advanced Excel


SQL proficiency (writing/optimizing queries)


Data analysis and interpretation


A/B and multivariate testing


Tableau (or similar BI tools like Looker, Power BI, Domo)


Marketing mix modeling (MMM)


Multi-touch attribution methods


Financial/budget management (forecasting, accounting principles)


Web analytics (Google Analytics, Adobe Analytics)


Statistical analysis (regression, hypothesis testing)


Python or R (for data analysis)


Collaboration and communication (cross-functional teams)


Presentation and storytelling with data


Project/time management (managing multiple priorities)


Marketing automation platforms (Marketo, Pardot, Salesforce Marketing Cloud, HubSpot)
Job Functions (10–20)
These are recurring responsibilities, duties, or functions mentioned throughout the text:
Lead cross-channel marketing campaign reporting


Conduct advanced data analysis to extract insights


Develop and track key performance indicators (KPIs)


Manage and reconcile marketing budgets and invoices


Perform A/B and multivariate testing (design frameworks, validate implementations)


Collaborate with agencies and internal teams (channel leads, product, engineering)


Present data-driven findings (stakeholder presentations, leadership updates)


Optimize marketing spend and ROI through data-driven recommendations


Segment audiences (behavior/demographics) for targeted campaigns


Maintain and improve data integrity (governance, accuracy, and cleaning)


Develop dashboards and reports (Tableau, Domo, Looker) for performance tracking


Partner with BI and data engineering to ensure robust analytics infrastructure


Implement multi-touch attribution models (and marketing mix modeling)


Analyze churn and retention (customer upsells, loyalty, ROI)


Manage conversion funnel analytics (from acquisition to retention)


Brand Management
Brand Strategy
Brand Positioning: Defining unique market position and differentiators.


Brand Mission & Vision: Articulating overarching purpose and long-term direction.


Brand Values & Personality: Establishing emotional and behavioral attributes that guide brand actions.
Brand Architecture & Portfolio Management
Brand Architecture Models: Deciding whether to use a monolithic (single brand), endorsed, or multi-brand approach.


Brand Extensions: Launching new products or services under existing brand name(s).


Co-Branding & Licensing: Partnering with complementary brands and managing licensing agreements.


Brand Identity & Creative Assets
Brand Naming & Taglines: Selecting and refining the verbal brand identity.


Visual Identity Systems: Designing and managing logos, color palettes, typography, and other graphic elements.


Brand Style Guidelines: Documenting rules and standards for consistent application of brand elements.


Brand Voice & Tone: Defining how the brand “speaks” across different channels and contexts.
Brand Messaging & Storytelling
Core Messaging Framework: Crafting key messages tailored to different audiences and use cases.


Narrative & Storytelling: Developing brand stories that convey values, heritage, and points of differentiation.


Content & Campaign Development: Translating brand messages into integrated marketing initiatives (videos, articles, ads, etc.).
Brand Governance & Compliance


Internal Brand Training: Educating employees on how to represent and communicate the brand.


Trademark & Legal Protection: Securing and managing brand trademarks, copyrights, and usage rights.


Brand Asset Management: Organizing and distributing approved logos, graphics, and templates.


Consistent Application: Ensuring consistent use of brand identity across all touchpoints (websites, packaging, social media, etc.).
Brand Reputation & Crisis Management
Monitoring & Listening: Tracking brand mentions, sentiment, and competitive insights in the media and on social platforms.


Reputation Management: Addressing negative publicity, complaints, and crisis situations proactively and transparently.


Crisis Communication Plans: Developing strategies, messaging, and protocols to respond effectively to urgent issues.
Brand Experience & Engagement
Customer Experience (CX): Aligning brand promise with every point in the customer journey—online and offline.


Employee Engagement & Brand Advocacy: Encouraging employees to become ambassadors of the brand.


Experiential Marketing & Events: Designing memorable experiences that bring brand values to life and engage audiences.
Brand Performance & Analytics
Brand Equity & Health Tracking: Measuring awareness, consideration, loyalty, and overall brand perception.


KPIs & Metrics: Establishing quantitative and qualitative benchmarks (e.g., Net Promoter Score, share of voice, sentiment analysis).


Competitive Benchmarking: Comparing performance and perception against key industry competitors.


Reporting & Insights: Presenting actionable insights to guide strategic decision-making and resource allocation.
Brand Extension & Growth
New Market Entry: Adapting brand strategy when expanding into new regions or audiences.


Innovation & Product Development: Infusing brand DNA into new product lines or service offerings.


Globalization vs. Localization: Balancing a consistent global brand identity with localized messaging and cultural nuances.



Product Marketing


Marketing Strategy & Planning


Marketing Communications (MarCom)


Digital Marketing


Social Media Marketing


Content Marketing


Search Engine Marketing (SEM) & Search Engine Optimization (SEO)


Paid Advertising / Pay-Per-Click (PPC)


Email Marketing & Marketing Automation


Market Research & Insights


Marketing Analytics & Reporting


Public Relations (PR)


Influencer Marketing


Partnership & Affiliate Marketing


Event Marketing & Sponsorships


Trade Marketing & Channel Marketing


Field Marketing


Demand Generation & Lead Generation


Growth Marketing / Performance Marketing


Customer Relationship Management (CRM) & Retention


Ecommerce & Online Merchandising


Product Launch & Go-to-Market (GTM) Planning


Experiential & Brand Activation Marketing


Marketing Operations & Technology (MarTech)




marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
analytics strategy
data analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
analytics strategy
marketing strategy insights
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
analytics strategy
marketing performance reporting
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
campaign & marketing analysis
campaign analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
campaign & marketing analysis
campaign attribution
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
campaign & marketing analysis
marketing mix modeling
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
campaign & marketing analysis
channel performance
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
campaign & marketing analysis
segmentation analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
campaign & marketing analysis
multi-channel analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
campaign & marketing analysis
lead analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
financial analysis
budget analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
financial analysis
revenue attribution
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
financial analysis
cost-per-acquisition (cpa)
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
data science & advanced analysis
predictive analytics
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
data science & advanced analysis
descriptive analytics
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
data science & advanced analysis
machine learning models
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
data science & advanced analysis
forecasting techniques
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
reporting & visualization
data visualization
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
reporting & visualization
dashboard creation
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
reporting & visualization
storytelling with data
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
reporting & visualization
visualization tools
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
technical skills
business intelligence tools
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
technical skills
sql and query writing
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
technical skills
data warehousing
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
technical skills
python/r programming
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
technical skills
advanced excel
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
technical skills
digital marketing tools
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
technical skills
google analytics
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
technical skills
marketing automation tools
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
reporting & visualization
performance dashboards
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
financial analysis
marketing roi analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
customer insights
customer experience analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
customer insights
customer retention analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
campaign & marketing analysis
experimentation strategies
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
financial analysis
customer lifetime value (clv)
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
customer insights
user behavior analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
customer insights
user journey mapping
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
data science & advanced analysis
predictive modeling
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
experimentation & testing
funnel analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
digital marketing
digital marketing analytics
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
digital marketing
cross-channel analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
customer analysis
customer retention metrics
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
campaign analysis
lead attribution
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
campaign analysis
engagement metrics
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
experimentation & testing
experimentation strategy
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
reporting & visualization
reporting & visualization
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
reporting & visualization
data storytelling
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
reporting & visualization
dashboard development
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
reporting & visualization
data visualization tools
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
analytics tools
adobe analytics
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
analytics tools
power bi
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
technical skills
python for data analysis
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
technical skills
r programming
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
technical skills
bigquery
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
technical skills
database management
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
marketing automation
marketing automation integration
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
collaboration
team collaboration
marketing analytics [m]
data & analytics
collaboration
cross-functional communication
product growth [m]
analytics (& data analysis)
analytics strategy
marketing analytics
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
growth metrics & kpis
lifetime value (ltv)
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
experimentation & testing
funnel optimization
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
growth metrics & kpis
churn rate
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
data analysis
product analytics
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
data analysis
behavioral analysis
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
customer focus
customer retention strategies
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
acquisition & channels
acquisition channels
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
acquisition & channels
organic traffic growth
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
acquisition & channels
referral programs
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
customer focus
personalization
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
growth strategy
revenue growth
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
creative & acquisition strategies
viral marketing
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
experimentation & testing
creative testing
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
product & customer focus
product adoption
growth marketing [m]
growth marketing
technology & digital
api integrations
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
leadership & strategy
vision & leadership
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
leadership & strategy
business growth
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
leadership & strategy
brand strategy
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
leadership & strategy
executive leadership
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
leadership & strategy
go-to-market strategy (gtm)
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
leadership & strategy
cross-functional leadership
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
leadership & strategy
market penetration
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
leadership & strategy
business development
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
team & collaboration
people management
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
team & collaboration
coaching & mentoring
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
team & collaboration
talent development
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
team & collaboration
collaboration with sales
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
team & collaboration
inter-departmental coordination
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
team & collaboration
stakeholder engagement
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
team & collaboration
change management
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
performance & measurement
roi analysis
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
performance & measurement
kpi setting
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
performance & measurement
marketing roi
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
performance & measurement
marketing effectiveness
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
performance & measurement
market analysis
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
financial planning & operations
financial forecasting
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
financial planning & operations
cost optimization
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
financial planning & operations
risk management
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
financial planning & operations
financial accountability
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
market insights & trends
market trends
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
market insights & trends
industry expertise
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
market insights & trends
consumer behavior
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
brand & content
brand positioning
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
brand & content
brand building
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
brand & content
creative direction
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
brand & content
communications strategy
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
digital & innovation
digital transformation
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
digital & innovation
innovation & growth
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
digital & innovation
digital strategy
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
digital & innovation
technology integration
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
product & customer focus
product launch
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
product & customer focus
product strategy
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
product & customer focus
customer experience (cx)
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
campaigns & execution
integrated marketing campaigns
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
campaigns & execution
acquisition & retention strategies
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
communication & external relationships
executive communication
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
communication & external relationships
public relations
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
communication & external relationships
external stakeholder management
[m] manager
marketing (dem & acq)
communication & external relationships
crisis management
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
demand generation
demand generation strategy
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
demand generation
pipeline development
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
demand generation
marketing qualified leads (mql)
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
demand generation
account-based marketing (abm)
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaigns
multi-channel campaigns
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaigns
paid advertising
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaigns
webinars
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaigns
events and sponsorships
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaigns
content syndication
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaigns
content marketing
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
sales alignment
sales funnel
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
sales alignment
lead nurturing
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
sales alignment
sales enablement
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
sales alignment
alignment with sales teams
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
sales alignment
lead scoring
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical knowledge
crm integration
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
metrics & analysis
lead conversion metrics
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
metrics & analysis
attribution modeling
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
metrics & analysis
customer acquisition cost (cac)
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
metrics & analysis
return on investment (roi)
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
metrics & analysis
conversion rate optimization
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
creative skills
content development
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
creative skills
brand messaging
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
customer focus
retention strategies
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
customer focus
account management
demand generation [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
acquisition strategy
user acquisition strategy
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
marketing strategy
marketing strategy
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
marketing strategy
campaign planning
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
marketing strategy
market positioning
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
marketing strategy
content strategy
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
marketing strategy
demand generation
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaigns & execution
digital marketing
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaigns & execution
event planning
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaigns & execution
marketing automation
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaigns & execution
brand awareness
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
collaboration
cross-functional collaboration
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
collaboration
team leadership
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
collaboration
project management
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
customer focus
customer relationship management
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
customer focus
user engagement
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
customer focus
customer retention
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
metrics & analysis
market performance monitoring
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
operations
budget management
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
operations
resource allocation
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
operations
team coordination
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
creative skills
graphic design understanding
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
creative skills
brand consistency
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical knowledge
technical skills
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical knowledge
crm tools
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical knowledge
marketing automation software
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical knowledge
digital channels
marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
web strategy
website strategy
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
on-page seo
on-page optimization, onpage optimization
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
off-page seo
off-page optimization, offpage optimization
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
seo strategy
keyword research
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
on-page seo
content optimization
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
off-page seo
link building, backlink building
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
off-page seo
backlink analysis
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
seo strategy
competitor analysis
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical seo
seo audits
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical seo
site architecture
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical seo
crawlability
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical seo
mobile seo
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical seo
page speed optimization
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical seo
core web vitals
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical seo
schema markup
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
on-page seo
meta tags optimization
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
analytics
google search console
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
analytics
rank tracking
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
collaboration
digital marketing integration
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
seo strategy
algorithm updates
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
seo strategy
market trends analysis
seo [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
leadership & strategy
strategic planning
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
marketing automation
hubspot
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
marketing automation
marketo
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
marketing automation
salesforce pardot
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
email marketing
mailchimp
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
email marketing
activecampaign
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
email marketing
klaviyo
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
marketing analytics
google data studio
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
marketing analytics
tableau
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
marketing analytics
microsoft power bi
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
seo & sem
semrush
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
seo & sem
ahrefs
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
seo & sem
moz
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
seo & sem
screaming frog
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
seo & sem
google keyword planner
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
seo & sem
yoast seo
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
seo & sem
brightedge
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
seo & sem
spyfu
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
sem & ppc
google ads
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
sem & ppc
bing ads
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
social media marketing
facebook ads manager
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
social media marketing
linkedin ads
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
social media marketing
twitter ads
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
social media marketing
instagram ads
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
social media marketing
hootsuite
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
social media marketing
buffer
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
social media marketing
sprout social
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
social media marketing
socialbee
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
affiliate marketing
clickmeter
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
affiliate marketing
post affiliate pro
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
affiliate marketing
cj affiliate
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
affiliate marketing
rakuten marketing
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
affiliate marketing
awin
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
affiliate marketing
referralcandy
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
branding & pr
buzzstream
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
branding & pr
muck rack
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
branding & pr
cision
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
branding & pr
pr newswire
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
branding & pr
haro (help a reporter out)
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
brand monitoring
brand24
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
brand monitoring
mention
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
brand monitoring
brandwatch
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
brand monitoring
reputology
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
creative & design
canva
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
creative & design
adobe creative cloud
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
creative & design
figma
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
creative & design
sketch
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
project management
asana
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
project management
trello
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
project management
monday.com
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
project management
jira
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
communication
slack
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
communication
microsoft teams
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
communication
zoom
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
workflow automation
zapier
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
marketing automation
google tag manager
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
cro & experimentation
optimizely
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
cro & experimentation
vwo (visual website optimizer)
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
cro & experimentation
hotjar
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
cro & experimentation
crazy egg
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
customer feedback
surveymonkey
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
customer feedback
qualtrics
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
customer feedback
typeform
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
workflow automation
slack integration
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
general productivity
g suite
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
general productivity
microsoft office 365
tools & resources
marketing (dem & acq)
file sharing & collaboration
dropbox
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
acquisition strategy
growth marketing
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
acquisition strategy
user growth
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
acquisition strategy
paid media
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
digital advertising
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
campaign optimization
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
conversion rate optimization (cro)
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
user funnel analysis
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
paid social
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
display advertising
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
programmatic advertising
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
app install campaigns
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
affiliate marketing
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
user retargeting
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
multi-channel marketing
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
data & analysis
performance metrics
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
data & analysis
cohort analysis
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
data & analysis
retention analysis
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
customer focus
user experience (ux)
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
customer focus
user feedback
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
customer focus
user retention strategies
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical skills
mobile marketing
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
customer focus
user insights
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
customer focus
customer feedback analysis
user acquisition [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical skills
app store optimization (aso)
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
web strategy
digital marketing strategy
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
web strategy
website optimization
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
content & seo
web content strategy
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
content & seo
seo (search engine optimization)
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
content & seo
content management system (cms)
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
analytics
web analytics
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
analytics
traffic analysis
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
analytics
landing page optimization
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
website traffic growth
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
campaign management
social media integration
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical skills
website architecture
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical skills
website management
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical skills
web technologies
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical skills
html/css
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical skills
javascript basics
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical skills
technical seo
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
creative skills
visual design principles
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
analytics
heatmaps
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
analytics
tag management
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
analytics
marketing funnel analysis
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
content & seo
content calendar management
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
analytics
performance reporting
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
technical skills
app integration
web marketing [m]
marketing (dem & acq)
seo strategy
seo strategy
product growth [m]
product
growth strategy
product-led growth
product growth [m]
product
growth strategy
product market fit
product growth [m]
product
growth strategy
growth experiments
product growth [m]
product
user growth
user retention
product growth [m]
product
user growth
activation metrics
product growth [m]
product
user growth
user onboarding
product growth [m]
product
user growth
churn analysis
product growth [m]
product
collaboration
alignment with product teams
product growth [m]
product
data & analysis
growth metrics
product growth [m]
product
data & analysis
product analytics tools
product growth [m]
product
customer focus
voice of the customer
product growth [m]
product
product management
product roadmap
product growth [m]
product
product management
feature prioritization
product growth [m]
product
product management
product experimentation
product growth [m]
product
technical skills
api integration
product growth [m]
product
creative skills
growth hacking
product marketing [m]
product
market research
market research
product marketing [m]
product
market research
competitive analysis
product marketing [m]
product
market research
customer insights
product marketing [m]
product
market research
market segmentation
product marketing [m]
product
market research
target audience
product marketing [m]
product
market research
trend analysis
product marketing [m]
product
market research
user personas
product marketing [m]
product
product strategy
go-to-market strategy
product marketing [m]
product
product strategy
product positioning
product marketing [m]
product
product strategy
product differentiation
product marketing [m]
product
product strategy
product lifecycle management
product marketing [m]
product
product strategy
value proposition
product marketing [m]
product
product strategy
market fit
product marketing [m]
product
campaigns & messaging
marketing campaigns
product marketing [m]
product
campaigns & messaging
messaging development
product marketing [m]
product
campaigns & messaging
content creation
product marketing [m]
product
campaigns & messaging
branding
product marketing [m]
product
campaigns & messaging
storytelling
product marketing [m]
product
campaigns & messaging
communication strategies
product marketing [m]
product
sales enablement
sales collateral
product marketing [m]
product
sales enablement
sales training
product marketing [m]
product
sales enablement
product demos
product marketing [m]
product
sales enablement
lead generation
product marketing [m]
product
sales enablement
sales support materials
product marketing [m]
product
sales enablement
customer journey mapping
product marketing [m]
product
digital marketing
seo/sem
product marketing [m]
product
digital marketing
social media marketing
product marketing [m]
product
digital marketing
email marketing
product marketing [m]
product
digital marketing
ppc (pay-per-click)
product marketing [m]
product
digital marketing
performance marketing
product marketing [m]
product
digital marketing
analytics and reporting
product marketing [m]
product
cross-functional collaboration
stakeholder management
product marketing [m]
product
cross-functional collaboration
cross-functional teams
product marketing [m]
product
cross-functional collaboration
alignment with product development
product marketing [m]
product
cross-functional collaboration
coordination with sales
product marketing [m]
product
product launch
product launch strategy
product marketing [m]
product
product launch
launch plans
product marketing [m]
product
product launch
feature release management
product marketing [m]
product
product launch
timeline coordination
product marketing [m]
product
product launch
marketing roadmap
product marketing [m]
product
metrics & analytics
kpi tracking
product marketing [m]
product
metrics & analytics
roi measurement
product marketing [m]
product
metrics & analytics
customer acquisition
product marketing [m]
product
metrics & analytics
retention metrics
product marketing [m]
product
metrics & analytics
a/b testing
product marketing [m]
product
metrics & analytics
data-driven decision-making
product marketing [m]
product
customer focus
customer experience
product marketing [m]
product
customer focus
customer feedback
product marketing [m]
product
customer focus
user testing
product marketing [m]
product
customer focus
customer success stories
product marketing [m]
product
customer focus
product adoption strategies
product marketing [m]
product
technical knowledge
product knowledge
product marketing [m]
product
technical knowledge
saas understanding
product marketing [m]
product
technical knowledge
api familiarity
product marketing [m]
product
technical knowledge
product development process
product marketing [m]
product
creative skills
copywriting
product marketing [m]
product
creative skills
visual design understanding
product marketing [m]
product
creative skills
creative thinking
product marketing [m]
product
creative skills
brand development
product marketing [m]
product
growth strategy
growth strategy





Marketing










Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Strategy






Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Strategy
Brand Positioning




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Strategy
Brand Mission & Vision




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Strategy
Brand Values & Personality




Marketing
Brand Management








Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Architecture & Portfolio Management






Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Architecture & Portfolio Management
Brand Architecture Models




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Architecture & Portfolio Management
Brand Extensions




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Architecture & Portfolio Management
Co-Branding & Licensing




Marketing
Brand Management








Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Identity & Creative Assets






Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Identity & Creative Assets
Brand Naming & Taglines




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Identity & Creative Assets
Visual Identity Systems




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Identity & Creative Assets
Brand Style Guidelines




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Identity & Creative Assets
Brand Voice & Tone




Marketing
Brand Management








Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Messaging & Storytelling






Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Messaging & Storytelling
Core Messaging Framework




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Messaging & Storytelling
Narrative & Storytelling




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Messaging & Storytelling
Content & Campaign Development




Marketing
Brand Management








Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Governance & Compliance






Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Governance & Compliance
Internal Brand Training




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Governance & Compliance
Trademark & Legal Protection




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Governance & Compliance
Brand Asset Management




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Governance & Compliance
Consistent Application




Marketing
Brand Management








Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Reputation & Crisis Management






Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Reputation & Crisis Management
Monitoring & Listening




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Reputation & Crisis Management
Reputation Management




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Reputation & Crisis Management
Crisis Communication Plans




Marketing
Brand Management








Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Experience & Engagement






Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Experience & Engagement
Customer Experience (CX)




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Experience & Engagement
Employee Engagement & Brand Advocacy




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Experience & Engagement
Experiential Marketing & Events




Marketing
Brand Management








Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Performance & Analytics






Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Performance & Analytics
Brand Equity & Health Tracking




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Performance & Analytics
KPIs & Metrics




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Performance & Analytics
Competitive Benchmarking




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Performance & Analytics
Reporting & Insights




Marketing
Brand Management








Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Extension & Growth






Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Extension & Growth
New Market Entry




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Extension & Growth
Innovation & Product Development




Marketing
Brand Management
Brand Extension & Growth
Globalization vs. Localization




Marketing










Marketing










Marketing










Marketing










Marketing
Product Marketing
Market & Competitive Research






Marketing
Product Marketing
Market & Competitive Research
Market Trends Analysis




Marketing
Product Marketing
Market & Competitive Research
Customer Persona Development




Marketing
Product Marketing
Market & Competitive Research
Voice-of-Customer (VoC) & Win/Loss Analysis




Marketing
Product Marketing








Marketing
Product Marketing
Positioning & Messaging






Marketing
Product Marketing
Positioning & Messaging
Messaging Architecture




Marketing
Product Marketing
Positioning & Messaging
Product Value Proposition




Marketing
Product Marketing
Positioning & Messaging
Differentiation Strategy




Marketing
Product Marketing








Marketing
Product Marketing
Go-to-Market (GTM) Strategy






Marketing
Product Marketing
Go-to-Market (GTM) Strategy
Market Requirements Documentation (MRD)




Marketing
Product Marketing
Go-to-Market (GTM) Strategy
Launch Planning & Coordination




Marketing
Product Marketing
Go-to-Market (GTM) Strategy
Partner & Channel Strategy




Marketing
Product Marketing








Marketing
Product Marketing
Sales Enablement






Marketing
Product Marketing
Sales Enablement
Product Training & Onboarding




Marketing
Product Marketing
Sales Enablement
Competitive Battlecards




Marketing
Product Marketing
Sales Enablement
Collateral Development




Marketing
Product Marketing








Marketing
Product Marketing
Lifecycle Management






Marketing
Product Marketing
Lifecycle Management
Feature Prioritization & Roadmap




Marketing
Product Marketing
Lifecycle Management
Product Sunset & Transition




Marketing
Product Marketing
Lifecycle Management
Ongoing Customer Engagement




Marketing
Product Marketing








Marketing
Product Marketing
Product Launch & Adoption






Marketing
Product Marketing
Product Launch & Adoption
Beta Program Management




Marketing
Product Marketing
Product Launch & Adoption
Product Onboarding Strategies




Marketing
Product Marketing
Product Launch & Adoption
Post-Launch Marketing




Marketing
Product Marketing








Marketing
Product Marketing
Pricing & Packaging






Marketing
Product Marketing
Pricing & Packaging
Bundling & Packaging Options




Marketing
Product Marketing
Pricing & Packaging
Value-Based Pricing Considerations




Marketing
Product Marketing
Pricing & Packaging
Promotional Strategies




Marketing
Product Marketing








Marketing
Product Marketing
Product Marketing Metrics & Analytics






Marketing
Product Marketing
Product Marketing Metrics & Analytics
Market Share & Revenue Impact




Marketing
Product Marketing
Product Marketing Metrics & Analytics
Post-Launch Evaluation & Insights




Marketing
Product Marketing
Product Marketing Metrics & Analytics
Customer Retention & Upsell Rates




Marketing










Marketing










Marketing










Marketing










Marketing










Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Market & Environmental Analysis






Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Market & Environmental Analysis
Macro-Trend Research




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Market & Environmental Analysis
SWOT & PESTLE Assessments




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Market & Environmental Analysis
Industry Benchmarking




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning








Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Target Audience & Segmentation






Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Target Audience & Segmentation
Demographic Segmentation




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Target Audience & Segmentation
Psychographic & Behavioral Insights




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Target Audience & Segmentation
Persona Development




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning








Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Competitive Positioning & Differentiation






Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Competitive Positioning & Differentiation
Competitive Landscape Assessment




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Competitive Positioning & Differentiation
Unique Value Proposition (UVP)




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Competitive Positioning & Differentiation
Gap Analysis




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning








Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Goal Setting & KPIs






Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Goal Setting & KPIs
SMART Objective Framework




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Goal Setting & KPIs
Primary & Secondary KPIs




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Goal Setting & KPIs
Milestone & Target Setting




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning








Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Budget & Resource Allocation






Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Budget & Resource Allocation
Annual Budget Planning




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Budget & Resource Allocation
ROI-Based Allocation




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Budget & Resource Allocation
Resource & Staffing Plans




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning








Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Channel & Tactics Planning






Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Channel & Tactics Planning
Omnichannel Strategy




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Channel & Tactics Planning
Digital & Traditional Tactics




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Channel & Tactics Planning
Partnerships & Collaborations




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning








Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Campaign Calendar & Cross-Functional Alignment






Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Campaign Calendar & Cross-Functional Alignment
Marketing Calendar




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Campaign Calendar & Cross-Functional Alignment
Collaboration with Sales & Product




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Campaign Calendar & Cross-Functional Alignment
Stakeholder Communication




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning








Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Performance Measurement & Iteration






Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Performance Measurement & Iteration
Data Tracking & Reporting




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Performance Measurement & Iteration
Post-Campaign Analysis




Marketing
Marketing Strategy & Planning
Performance Measurement & Iteration
Continuous Improvement Cycle




Marketing










Marketing










Marketing










Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Communications Strategy & Messaging






Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Communications Strategy & Messaging
Message Architecture




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Communications Strategy & Messaging
Tone & Voice Alignment




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Communications Strategy & Messaging
Audience-Specific Positioning




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)








Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Content Planning & Production






Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Content Planning & Production
Editorial Calendar




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Content Planning & Production
Copywriting & Storytelling




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Content Planning & Production
Visual Content & Design




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Content Planning & Production
Multimedia Production




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)








Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Channel Strategy & Distribution






Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Channel Strategy & Distribution
Owned Media




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Channel Strategy & Distribution
Earned Media




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Channel Strategy & Distribution
Shared Media




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Channel Strategy & Distribution
Paid Media




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)








Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Public Relations & Media Relations






Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Public Relations & Media Relations
Press Releases & Media Kits




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Public Relations & Media Relations
Media Outreach & Pitching




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Public Relations & Media Relations
Event Press Management




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Public Relations & Media Relations
Crisis Communication




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)








Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Internal & Corporate Communications






Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Internal & Corporate Communications
Executive Communications




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Internal & Corporate Communications
Employee Engagement Campaigns




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Internal & Corporate Communications
Intranet & Newsletter Management




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Internal & Corporate Communications
Change Management Communication




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)








Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Event & Experiential Communications






Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Event & Experiential Communications
Trade Shows & Conferences




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Event & Experiential Communications
Webinars & Virtual Events




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Event & Experiential Communications
Experiential Marketing Activations




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Event & Experiential Communications
Promotional Materials & Collateral




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)








Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Agency & Vendor Management






Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Agency & Vendor Management
Creative Agency Coordination




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Agency & Vendor Management
PR & Media Agency Relations




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Agency & Vendor Management
Negotiation & Contracting




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Agency & Vendor Management
Performance Evaluation & Feedback




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)








Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Measurement & Evaluation






Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Measurement & Evaluation
KPIs & Metrics




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Measurement & Evaluation
Analytics & Reporting Tools




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Measurement & Evaluation
Post-Campaign Review




Marketing
Marketing Communications (MarCom)
Measurement & Evaluation
Continuous Improvement Loop




Marketing










Marketing










Marketing










Marketing










Marketing










Marketing










Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)






Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
On-Page SEO




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
Off-Page SEO




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
Technical SEO




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
Local SEO
























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
SEM Strategy & Planning




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
SEM Strategy & Planning
Keyword Research & Selection


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
SEM Strategy & Planning
Competitor Analysis


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
SEM Strategy & Planning
Campaign Goals & KPIs


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
SEM Strategy & Planning
Channel Selection (Google Ads
Bing Ads)
Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
SEM Strategy & Planning
Account & Campaign Structure


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Ad Creation & Optimization




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Ad Creation & Optimization
Ad Copywriting


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Ad Creation & Optimization
Ad Extensions (Sitelinks, Callouts, etc.)


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Ad Creation & Optimization
A/B Testing & Experimentation


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Ad Creation & Optimization
Landing Page Alignment


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Bidding & Budget Management




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Bidding & Budget Management
Manual Bidding


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Bidding & Budget Management
Automated Bidding Strategies


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Bidding & Budget Management
Daily & Monthly Budget Allocation


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Bidding & Budget Management
Bid Adjustments (Device, Location, Time)


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Bidding & Budget Management
CPA & ROAS Targets


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Targeting & Audience Segmentation




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Targeting & Audience Segmentation
Demographic Targeting


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Targeting & Audience Segmentation
Location Targeting


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Targeting & Audience Segmentation
Device Targeting


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Targeting & Audience Segmentation
RLSA & Remarketing


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Targeting & Audience Segmentation
In-Market & Affinity Audiences


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Tracking & Analytics




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Tracking & Analytics
Conversion Tracking & Tags


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Tracking & Analytics
Quality Score Monitoring


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Tracking & Analytics
Search Query Reports


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Tracking & Analytics
Attribution Models


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Tracking & Analytics
Performance Dashboards


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Shopping & Product Ads




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Shopping & Product Ads
Google Merchant Center Setup


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Shopping & Product Ads
Product Feed Optimization


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Shopping & Product Ads
Product Listing Ads (PLAs)


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Shopping & Product Ads
Dynamic Remarketing


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Shopping & Product Ads
Pricing & Inventory Updates


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Display & Remarketing Campaigns




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Display & Remarketing Campaigns
Display Network Targeting


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Display & Remarketing Campaigns
Contextual & Placement Targeting


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Display & Remarketing Campaigns
YouTube Ads


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Display & Remarketing Campaigns
Dynamic Remarketing


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Display & Remarketing Campaigns
Frequency Capping


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
International & Multilingual SEM




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
International & Multilingual SEM
Localization & Language Targeting


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
International & Multilingual SEM
Country-Specific Search Engines (e.g.
Baidu)
Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
International & Multilingual SEM
Local Market Insights


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
International & Multilingual SEM
Currency & Payment Methods


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Tools & Automation




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Tools & Automation
Scripted Campaign Management


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Tools & Automation
Bid Management Platforms


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Tools & Automation
Keyword Research Tools


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Tools & Automation
Performance Alert Systems


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Pay-Per-Click (PPC) Advertising




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Organic Social Media




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Media Advertising




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Community Management




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Influencer Outreach




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Media Platforms,




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Media Platforms,Facebook & Instagram




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Media Platforms,Twitter (X)




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Media Platforms,LinkedIn




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Media Platforms,TikTok




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Media Platforms,Pinterest




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Media Platforms,Snapchat




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Content Strategy & Editorial Calendar,




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Content Strategy & Editorial Calendar,Content Planning




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Content Strategy & Editorial Calendar,Scheduling & Publishing




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Content Strategy & Editorial Calendar,Multimedia Creation (Images/Video)




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Content Strategy & Editorial Calendar,Story/Reels Content




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Content Strategy & Editorial Calendar,Cross-Platform Adaptation




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Community Management & Engagement,




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Community Management & Engagement,User Comment Moderation




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Community Management & Engagement,Responding to Messages & Inquiries




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Community Management & Engagement,Live Streams & Q&A Sessions




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Community Management & Engagement,Group & Community Building




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Listening & Reputation Management,




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Listening & Reputation Management,Monitoring Brand Mentions




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Listening & Reputation Management,Sentiment Analysis




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Listening & Reputation Management,Crisis Response




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Paid Social Advertising,




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Paid Social Advertising,Campaign Setup & Targeting




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Paid Social Advertising,Budget & Bid Management




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Paid Social Advertising,Ad Creative & Copy




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Paid Social Advertising,Retargeting Campaigns




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Paid Social Advertising,Pixel & Conversion Tracking




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Influencer Marketing & Partnerships,




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Influencer Marketing & Partnerships,Identifying Relevant Influencers




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Influencer Marketing & Partnerships,Outreach & Negotiation




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Influencer Marketing & Partnerships,Campaign Collaboration




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Influencer Marketing & Partnerships,Performance Tracking




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Analytics & Reporting,




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Analytics & Reporting,Platform Insights (e.g., Facebook Insights)




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Analytics & Reporting,KPI Tracking (Engagement, Reach)




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Analytics & Reporting,Reporting & Dashboards




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Analytics & Reporting,Performance Optimization




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Tools & Governance,




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Tools & Governance,Scheduling & Publishing Tools




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Tools & Governance,Brand & Social Guidelines




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Tools & Governance,Platform Policy Compliance




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Tools & Governance,Training & Access Management




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Blog Strategy




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Distribution




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Repurposing




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance Analysis




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing






Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research
Audience & Persona Analysis


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research
Market & Topic Research


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research
Competitor Content Analysis


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research
Keyword Strategy & Gap Analysis


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research
Content Pillars & Themes


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research
Editorial Calendar & Planning


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research
Goal Setting and KPIs


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research
Target Audience Analysis


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research
Brand Voice Development


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research
Content Audit and Gap Analysis


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research
Editorial Calendar Planning


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Strategy & Research
Distribution Channel Selection


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats
Blog & Article Writing


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats
Video Production & Editing


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats
Podcasts & Audio Content


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats
Infographics & Visual Content


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats
Ebooks & Whitepapers


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats
Webinars & Virtual Events


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats
Written Content (Blog Posts, Articles, Whitepapers)


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats
Visual Content (Infographics, Images, Charts)


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats
Video Content (Tutorials, Interviews, Product Demos)


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats
Audio Content (Podcasts, Interviews)


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats
Interactive Content (Quizzes, Calculators, Tools)


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Creation & Formats
User-Generated Content


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Optimization & SEO




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Optimization & SEO
On-Page SEO


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Optimization & SEO
Keyword Optimization


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Optimization & SEO
Metadata & Schema Markup


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Optimization & SEO
Readability & Formatting


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Optimization & SEO
Content Refresh & Updating


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion
Social Media Distribution


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion
Email Marketing


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion
Syndication & Guest Posting


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion
Influencer & Partnership Outreach


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion
Paid Content Promotion & Amplification


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion
Community Forums & Groups


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion
Social Media Marketing


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion
Email Marketing


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion
SEO Optimization


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion
Paid Content Promotion


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion
Content Syndication


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Distribution & Promotion
Community Management


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Repurposing & Lifecycle




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Repurposing & Lifecycle
Format Transformation (e.g.
blog to podcast)
Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Repurposing & Lifecycle
Channel-Specific Adaptation


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Repurposing & Lifecycle
Evergreen vs. Time-Sensitive Content


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Repurposing & Lifecycle
Archival Strategy & Sunset Planning


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance & Analytics




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance & Analytics
KPI Tracking (Engagement, Traffic, Conversions)


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance & Analytics
Heatmap & Scroll Tracking


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance & Analytics
A/B Testing & Experimentation


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance & Analytics
Content Scoring & ROI


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance & Analytics
Reporting & Insights


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance & Analytics
Analytics and Metrics


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance & Analytics
Engagement Tracking


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance & Analytics
ROI Measurement


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance & Analytics
A/B Testing


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance & Analytics
Content Optimization


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Performance & Analytics
Performance Reporting


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Governance & Editorial Standards




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Governance & Editorial Standards
Editorial Guidelines & Brand Voice


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Governance & Editorial Standards
Style & Consistency Rules


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Governance & Editorial Standards
Legal & Compliance Considerations


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Governance & Editorial Standards
Quality Assurance & Peer Review


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Governance & Editorial Standards
Version Control & Asset Management


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Governance & Editorial Standards
Copyright and Fair Use


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Governance & Editorial Standards
Disclosure Requirements


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Governance & Editorial Standards
Privacy Regulations


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Governance & Editorial Standards
Accessibility Standards


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Governance & Editorial Standards
Industry-Specific Regulations


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Governance & Editorial Standards
Content Permissions


Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Team & Resources




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Team & Resources
Team Structure and Roles


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Team & Resources
Skill Development


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Team & Resources
Content Tools and Software


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Team & Resources
Budget Planning


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Team & Resources
Outsourcing vs. In-house


Marketing
Digital Marketing
Content Marketing
Content Team & Resources
Training and Documentation
























































Strategy
Content Strategy
Audience Analysis






Strategy
Content Strategy
Content Planning






Strategy
Content Strategy
Content Calendar






Creation
Content Creation
Blog Writing






Creation
Content Creation
Video Production






Creation
Content Creation
Infographic Design






Distribution
Content Distribution
Social Media






Distribution
Content Distribution
Email Marketing






Distribution
Content Distribution
SEO






Measurement
Content Measurement
Analytics






Measurement
Content Measurement
KPIs






Measurement
Content Measurement
ROI






Tools
Content Tools
CMS






Tools
Content Tools
SEO Tools






Tools
Content Tools
Analytics Tools






Trends
Content Trends
AI in Content Marketing






Trends
Content Trends
Interactive Content






Trends
Content Trends
Personalization
















































Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Organic Social Media




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Social Media Advertising




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Community Management




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Social Media Marketing
Influencer Outreach
















Marketing
Digital Marketing
Email Marketing & Automation






Marketing
Digital Marketing
Email Marketing & Automation
Email Strategy




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Email Marketing & Automation
Email List Building




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Email Marketing & Automation
Email Campaign Creation




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Email Marketing & Automation
Drip Campaigns
























































































Marketing
Digital Marketing
Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO)






Marketing
Digital Marketing
Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO)
Landing Page Testing




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO)
A/B Testing




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO)
User Experience (UX) Optimizations




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO)
Funnel Analysis




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Mobile Marketing






Marketing
Digital Marketing
Mobile Marketing
Mobile App Campaigns




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Mobile Marketing
SMS Marketing




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Mobile Marketing
Push Notifications




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Mobile Marketing
App Store Optimization




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Analytics & Reporting






Marketing
Digital Marketing
Analytics & Reporting
Google Analytics




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Analytics & Reporting
Tag Management




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Analytics & Reporting
Attribution Modeling




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Analytics & Reporting
Performance Dashboarding




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Programmatic & Display Advertising






Marketing
Digital Marketing
Programmatic & Display Advertising
Real-Time Bidding (RTB)




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Programmatic & Display Advertising
Ad Exchanges




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Programmatic & Display Advertising
Audience Targeting




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Programmatic & Display Advertising
DSP/SSP Management




Marketing
Digital Marketing








Marketing
Digital Marketing
Affiliate & Partnership Marketing






Marketing
Digital Marketing
Affiliate & Partnership Marketing
Affiliate Recruitment




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Affiliate & Partnership Marketing
Commission Structures




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Affiliate & Partnership Marketing
Partner Relationship Management




Marketing
Digital Marketing
Affiliate & Partnership Marketing
Tracking & Reporting








Statistics & Mathematics
Probability & Statistics
Descriptive Statistics (Mean, Median, Mode, Variance, Standard Deviation)


Statistics & Mathematics
Probability & Statistics
Probability Distributions (Binomial, Normal, Poisson, etc.)


Statistics & Mathematics
Probability & Statistics
Hypothesis Testing (t-tests, ANOVA, Chi-Square)


Statistics & Mathematics
Probability & Statistics
Bayesian Statistics


Statistics & Mathematics
Data Modeling
Regression Analysis (Linear, Logistic, Multivariate)


Statistics & Mathematics
Data Modeling
Time Series Analysis


Statistics & Mathematics
Data Modeling
Predictive Modeling


Statistics & Mathematics
Experimental Design
A/B Testing


Statistics & Mathematics
Experimental Design
Multivariate Testing


Statistics & Mathematics
Experimental Design
Sample Size Calculation


Statistics & Mathematics
Advanced Mathematics
Matrix Algebra (for machine learning models)


Statistics & Mathematics
Advanced Mathematics
Calculus (for optimization problems)


Marketing Strategy & Management
User Acquisition & Demand Generation
-
-
Marketing Strategy & Management
Earned Acquisition
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
Keyword Research
Marketing Strategy & Management
Earned Acquisition
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
On-Page Optimization
Marketing Strategy & Management
Earned Acquisition
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
Off-Page Optimization (Backlink Building)
Marketing Strategy & Management
Earned Acquisition
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
Technical SEO (Crawl Optimization, Schema Markup)
Marketing Strategy & Management
Earned Acquisition
Content Strategy & Management
Content Calendar Development
Marketing Strategy & Management
Earned Acquisition
Content Strategy & Management
Content Optimization (SEO-driven content creation)
Marketing Strategy & Management
Earned Acquisition
Content Strategy & Management
Analytics for Content Performance (Bounce Rate, Scroll Depth)
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Google Ads (Keyword Bidding, Ad Extensions)
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Bing Ads
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Social Media Marketing (SMM)
Facebook Ads (Audience Targeting, Lookalike Audiences)
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Social Media Marketing (SMM)
LinkedIn Ads
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Social Media Marketing (SMM)
TikTok Ads
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Social Media Marketing (SMM)
Pinterest Ads
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Programmatic Advertising
Display Ads
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Programmatic Advertising
Retargeting Campaigns
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Email Marketing
Campaign Automation
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Email Marketing
Email A/B Testing (Subject Lines, Copy, Images)
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Email Marketing
Conversion Tracking
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Affiliate Marketing
Partner Recruitment & Management
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Affiliate Marketing
Tracking & Attribution
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO)
Funnel Analysis
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO)
Landing Page Optimization
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Branding & Public Relations
Brand Sentiment Analysis
Marketing Strategy & Management
Paid Acquisition
Branding & Public Relations
Earned Media Analytics








Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Analysis
Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM)


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Analysis
Attribution Modeling (First Touch, Last Touch, Multi-Touch)


Analytics & Data Analysis
Reporting & Dashboards
Google Analytics (GA4)


Analytics & Data Analysis
Reporting & Dashboards
Looker Studio (formerly Google Data Studio)


Analytics & Data Analysis
Reporting & Dashboards
Tableau/Power BI


Analytics & Data Analysis
Reporting & Dashboards
SQL for Custom Reporting


Analytics & Data Analysis
Campaign Analysis
Return on Ad Spend (ROAS)


Analytics & Data Analysis
Campaign Analysis
Cost Per Acquisition (CPA)


Analytics & Data Analysis
Campaign Analysis
Customer Lifetime Value (CLV)


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Warehousing & ETL
Data Integration (APIs, Data Pipelines)


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Warehousing & ETL
Tools: BigQuery, Snowflake, Redshift


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Science & Machine Learning
Predictive Analytics


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Science & Machine Learning
Churn Prediction


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Science & Machine Learning
Forecasting


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Science & Machine Learning
Natural Language Processing (NLP)


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Science & Machine Learning
Sentiment Analysis


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Science & Machine Learning
Text Classification


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Science & Machine Learning
Clustering & Segmentation


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Science & Machine Learning
Customer Segmentation


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Science & Machine Learning
Behavioral Segmentation


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Science & Machine Learning
Algorithms


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Science & Machine Learning
Decision Trees, Random Forests, Gradient Boosting


Analytics & Data Analysis
Data Science & Machine Learning
Neural Networks (for advanced marketers)










Technology & Tools
Marketing Analytics Platforms
Google Analytics, Adobe Analytics


Technology & Tools
Marketing Analytics Platforms
Mixpanel, Amplitude


Technology & Tools
Marketing Analytics Platforms
HubSpot, Marketo


Technology & Tools
Advertising Platforms
Google Ads Manager


Technology & Tools
Advertising Platforms
Facebook Ads Manager


Technology & Tools
Data & Visualization Tools
Tableau, Power BI


Technology & Tools
Data & Visualization Tools
Looker, QlikView


Technology & Tools
Programming Languages
Python (for Data Analysis, Visualization, Automation)


Technology & Tools
Data Storage & Manipulation
SQL


Technology & Tools
Data Storage & Manipulation
Excel (Advanced Functions, Pivot Tables, Macros)


Technology & Tools
Tracking Technologies
Google Tag Manager


Technology & Tools
Tracking Technologies
Pixels and UTM Parameters










Leadership & Strategy
Strategic Planning




Leadership & Strategy
Setting KPIs




Leadership & Strategy
Budget Allocation




Leadership & Strategy
Stakeholder Management




Leadership & Strategy
Cross-Functional Communication (Marketing, Product, Finance)




Leadership & Strategy
Team Management




Leadership & Strategy
Hiring & Training Analytics Teams




Leadership & Strategy
Defining Roles and Responsibilities




Leadership & Strategy
Vendor/Tool Management




Leadership & Strategy
Evaluating Software Tools




Leadership & Strategy
Managing External Agencies
















MARTECH
AD TECH
ENTERPRISE COLLABORATION
Marketing Analytics (36)
Ad Network (8)
Knowledge Management (11)
E-Commerce Marketing (23)
Demand Side Ad Platforms (8)


Lead Generation (20)
Mobile Ad Network (3)
BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE
Lead Management (18)
Supply Side Ad Platforms (3)
Data Preparation Platforms (32)
Content Marketing (33)
Native Ad Platform (3)
Text Analytics (15)
Customer Data Platforms (22)
Ad Exchange Platforms (1)
Call Analytics (5)
Market Research Tools (22)
Ad Fraud Detection (1)
Data Visualization (6)
Social Media Marketing (13)
Ad Attribution (1)
Enterprise Search (4)
Conversion Rate Optimization (12)


Manufacturing BI (4)
Influencer Marketing (10)
ENTERPRISE INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
Supply Chain Intelligence (3)
Mobile Marketing (8)
Data Security (60)
Real Estate Intelligence (3)
Marketing Surveys (7)
Knowledge Management (11)
Image and Video Analytics (1)
Email Marketing (5)
Enterprise Data Management (27)
HR Intelligence (1)
Referral Marketing (5)
Enterprise Content Management (14)


Omnichannel Marketing (4)
Enterprise Search (4)
SALES FORCE AUTOMATION
Search Engine Optimization (3)
Enterprise Document Management (10)
Lead Generation (20)
Campaign Management (3)
Data Governance (5)
Lead Management (18)
Account Based Marketing (2)
Records Management (2)
CRM for Enterprises (33)


Knowledge Graph Platforms (1)
Call Analytics (5)
BIG DATA ANALYTICS


Sales Enablement Tools (20)
Data Preparation Platforms (32)
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING
CRM for SMBs (6)
Text Analytics (15)
Text Analytics (15)
Configure Price Quote Software (4)
Call Analytics (5)


Seller Bots (2)
Streaming Analytics Platforms (8)
DATA AS A SERVICE
Sales Forecasting (2)
Data Visualization (6)
Property Data and Analytics (6)


Enterprise Search (4)
Satellite Imagery Services (6)
GENERATIVE AI
Data Science Platforms (5)
Healthcare Data (6)
Generative AI Enterprise Search (10)
Image and Video Analytics (1)
Securities and Trading Data (5)
Contact Center LLM (8)


Weather Intelligence (4)
Generative AI in Marketing (7)
ENTERPRISE NETWORKING
Private Market Intelligence (3)
Generative AI Drug Discovery (5)
Software Defined Networking (SDN) (9)
Crypto Asset Market Data (2)
AI Coding Assistant (4)
SD-WAN (5)
Alternative Data Platforms (2)
Generative AI Search Engines (3)
Networking Equipment (3)


AI Meeting Summary Tools (3)
Application Delivery Networks (2)
BIG DATA INFRASTRUCTURE
Generative AI in Sales (2)
Content Delivery Network (CDN) (2)
Streaming Analytics Platforms (8)
Generative AI Application Development (1)
Network Performance Monitoring (2)
NoSQL Database (5)
Generative AI Language Learning (1)
Network OS (2)
Enterprise Search (4)
Generative AI in Gaming (1)
Network Simulators (1)
Graph Database (2)
Generative AI in Legal (1)


Big Data Warehouse (1)
Text to Voice Generator (1)
CUSTOMER SUCCESS MANAGEMENT




Customer Feedback Tools (7)
BUSINESS PROCESS MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE
DATABASE TECH
Customer Success Management Platforms (3)
Workflow Automation (12)
NoSQL Database (5)
Customer Walkthroughs (2)
Low Code BPM (6)
SQL Database (11)
Customer Retention Management (1)
Process Mining (1)
Graph Database (2)




Database Management Tools (5)
PRODUCT MANAGEMENT
APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT TOOLS
In-Memory Database (4)
Product Usage Analytics (4)
Low Code Development Platforms (9)
Database as a Service (DBaaS) (3)
User Feedback Tools (3)
Website Builders (6)
NewSQL Database (1)
Design Collaboration (2)
Cross Platform IDEs (4)


Product Prototyping Platforms (1)
Automated Code Review (2)
CHATBOTS


Source Code Management (1)
Customer Service Chatbots (20)
BIG DATA - INDUSTRY APPLICATIONS


Chatbots for Financial Services (6)
Big Data in Advertising and Marketing (19)
SOFTWARE TESTING TOOLS
Chatbot Development Platforms (5)
Big Data in Financial Services (15)
Trending Themes in Software Testing Tools (22)
Internal Chatbots (5)
Big Data in Manufacturing (6)
Automated Testing Tools (10)
Healthcare Chatbots (4)
Big Data in Retail (4)
Security Testing (8)
Customer Service Voicebots (2)
Big Data in Healthcare (5)
Test Management (3)
Self Diagnosis Chatbots (1)
Big Data in Cybersecurity (3)
Crowdsourced Testing (1)










CONTENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (CMS)




Web Content Management System (6)




Headless Content Management System (5)




Digital Experience Management (3)






phrase
kwd-1
occurs
kwd-2
occurs
kwd-3
occurs
avg
marketing analytics
marketing
616
analytics
339


-
318
marketing communications
marketing
616
communications
-


-
308
marketing plans
marketing
616
plans
-


-
308
marketing programs
marketing
616
programs
-


-
308
marketing budgets
marketing
616
budgets
-


-
308
marketing insights
marketing
616
insights
137


-
251
marketing strategy
marketing
616
strategy
129


-
248
data modeling
data
485
modeling
-


-
243
marketing solutions
marketing
616
solutions
75


-
230
product marketing
product
70
marketing
616


-
229
strategic marketing
strategic
65
marketing
616


-
227
digital marketing
digital
50
marketing
616


-
222
digital marketing certification
digital
50
marketing
616
certification
-
222
marketing channels
marketing
616
channels
45


-
220
marketing initiatives
marketing
616
initiatives
42


-
219
marketing campaigns
marketing
616
campaigns
41


-
219
marketing efforts
marketing
616
efforts
39


-
218
marketing expertise
marketing
616
expertise
37


-
218
marketing operations
marketing
616
operations
36


-
217
consumer marketing
consumer
34
marketing
616


-
217
marketing mix
marketing
616
mix
30


-
215
marketing effectiveness
marketing
616
effectiveness
28


-
215
marketing metrics
marketing
616
metrics
21


-
212
marketing execution
marketing
616
execution
19


-
212
marketing techniques
marketing
616
techniques
17


-
211
email marketing
email
16
marketing
616


-
211
retail marketing
retail
16
marketing
616


-
211
marketing automation
marketing
616
automation
15


-
210
content marketing
content
12
marketing
616


-
209
online marketing
online
12
marketing
616


-
209
B2B marketing
B2B
10
marketing
616


-
209
marketing research
marketing
616
research
10


-
209
marketing objectives
marketing
616
objectives
10


-
209
marketing materials
marketing
616
materials
8


-
208
marketing activities
marketing
616
activities
7


-
208
data insights
data
485
insights
137


-
207
marketing tactics
marketing
616
tactics
5


-
207
customer data
customer
123
data
485


-
203
business analytics
business
241
analytics
339


-
193
work ll analytics
work
239
ll
-
analytics
339
193
data analysis
data
485
analysis
88


-
191
business consulting data
business
241
consulting
19
data
485
186
data science
data
485
science
55


-
180
data visualization
data
485
visualization
45


-
177
sales data
sales
38
data
485


-
174
data management
data
485
management
34


-
173
data engineering
data
485
engineering
31


-
172
social media marketing
social
11
media
58
marketing
616
171
analytics campaign
analytics
339
campaign
-


-
170
data mining
data
485
mining
6


-
164
analytics applicants business
analytics
339
applicants
37
business
241
154
customer analytics
customer
123
analytics
339


-
154
work world analytics
work
239
world
22
analytics
339
150
aim analysis analytics
aim
-
analysis
88
analytics
339
142
customer experience
customer
123
experience
301


-
141
amazon analytics
amazon
78
analytics
339


-
139
business strategy
business
241
strategy
129


-
123
analytics software
analytics
339
software
23


-
121
business processes
business
241
processes
-


-
121
business planning
business
241
planning
-


-
121
analytics applicable
analytics
339
applicable
21


-
120
web analytics
web
16
analytics
339


-
118
team collaboration
team
321
collaboration
25


-
115
amazon analytics applicants
amazon
78
analytics
339
applicants
37
114
user experience
user
13
experience
301


-
105
business growth
business
241
growth
62


-
101
analytical analytics audiences
analytical
39
analytics
339
audiences
20
100
analytics application brand
analytics
339
application
21
brand
36
99
business development
business
241
development
49


-
97
www action analytics
www
17
action
24
analytics
339
95
business operations
business
241
operations
36


-
92
analytics application billion
analytics
339
application
21
billion
5
91
business metrics
business
241
metrics
21


-
87
customer insights
customer
123
insights
137


-
87
business communities companies
business
241
communities
16
companies
-
86
business intelligence
business
241
intelligence
12


-
84
business objectives
business
241
objectives
10


-
84
insights job
insights
137
job
76


-
71
market insights
market
-
insights
137


-
69
performance reporting
performance
89
reporting
115


-
68
go-to-market strategy
go-to-market
-
strategy
129


-
65
pricing strategy
pricing
-
strategy
129


-
65
customer service
customer
123
service
65


-
63
customer relations
customer
123
relations
-


-
62
customer profiles
customer
123
profiles
-


-
62
customer base
customer
123
base
-


-
62
customer outreach
customer
123
outreach
-


-
62
digital strategy
digital
50
strategy
129


-
60
performance analysis
performance
89
analysis
88


-
59
consumer insights
consumer
34
insights
137


-
57
sales strategy
sales
38
strategy
129


-
56
brand strategy
brand
36
strategy
129


-
55
insights join
insights
137
join
23


-
53
strategic analysis
strategic
65
analysis
88


-
51
customer engagement
customer
123
engagement
29


-
51
innovations insights intelligence
innovations
-
insights
137
intelligence
12
50
customer journey
customer
123
journey
25


-
49
leadership development
leadership
96
development
49


-
48
cross-functional leadership
cross-functional
-
leadership
96


-
48
content strategy
content
12
strategy
129


-
47
insights join journey
insights
137
join
23
journey
25
46
lead generation
lead
131
generation
7


-
46
insights inventory
insights
137
inventory
1


-
46
customer segmentation
customer
123
segmentation
11


-
45
ecommerce strategy
ecommerce
4
strategy
129


-
44
lead nurturing
lead
131
nurturing
2


-
44
strategic decisions
strategic
65
decisions
68


-
44
customer acquisition
customer
123
acquisition
9


-
44
market analysis
market
-
analysis
88


-
44
customer retention
customer
123
retention
7


-
43
sales support
sales
38
support
91


-
43
customer lifecycle
customer
123
lifecycle
5


-
43
sales performance
sales
38
performance
89


-
42
target market analysis
target
33
market
-
analysis
88
40
financial analysis
financial
33
analysis
88


-
40
product development
product
70
development
49


-
40
insights intelligence liaison
insights
137
intelligence
12
liaison
2
38
program management
program
78
management
34


-
37
performance metrics
performance
89
metrics
21


-
37
digital media
digital
50
media
58


-
36
competitive analysis
competitive
20
analysis
88


-
36
strategic initiatives
strategic
65
initiatives
42


-
36
product strategies
product
70
strategies
-


-
35
product positioning
product
70
positioning
-


-
35
product launches
product
70
launches
-


-
35
product features
product
70
features
-


-
35
product management
product
70
management
34


-
35
strategic thinking
strategic
65
thinking
38


-
34
strategic planning
strategic
65
planning
-


-
33
strategic partnerships
strategic
65
partnerships
-


-
33
quantitative analysis
quantitative
7
analysis
88


-
32
digital channels
digital
50
channels
45


-
32
multivariate analysis
multivariate
7
analysis
88


-
32
digital platforms
digital
50
platforms
44


-
31
digital initiatives
digital
50
initiatives
42


-
31
product innovation
product
70
innovation
21


-
30
digital campaigns
digital
50
campaigns
41


-
30
product roadmap
product
70
roadmap
17


-
29
media planning
media
58
planning
-


-
29
brand development
brand
36
development
49


-
28
strategic approach
strategic
65
approach
19


-
28
revenue growth
revenue
21
growth
62


-
28
sales channels
sales
38
channels
45


-
28
sales initiatives
sales
38
initiatives
42


-
27
product launch
product
70
launch
5


-
25
strategic objectives
strategic
65
objectives
10


-
25
product lifecycle
product
70
lifecycle
5


-
25
digital technologies
digital
50
technologies
-


-
25
digital footprint
digital
50
footprint
-


-
25
strategic alignment
strategic
65
alignment
9


-
25
strategic direction
strategic
65
direction
9


-
25
sales operations
sales
38
operations
36


-
25
dashboard development
dashboard
-
development
49


-
25
algorithm development
algorithm
-
development
49


-
25
market development
market
-
development
49


-
25
sales management
sales
38
management
34


-
24
sql expertise
sql
35
expertise
37


-
24
brand management
brand
36
management
34


-
23
social media
social
11
media
58


-
23
sales effectiveness
sales
38
effectiveness
28


-
22
digital advertising
digital
50
advertising
14


-
21
digital content
digital
50
content
12


-
21
consumer trends
consumer
34
trends
28


-
21
content development
content
12
development
49


-
20
brand identity
brand
36
identity
25


-
20
brand equity
brand
36
equity
23


-
20
sales strategies
sales
38
strategies
-


-
19
sales forecasts
sales
38
forecasts
-


-
19
sales targets
sales
38
targets
-


-
19
stakeholder communication
stakeholder
-
communication
38


-
19
A/B testing
A/B
-
testing
38


-
19
digital ecosystem
digital
50
ecosystem
7


-
19
sales pipeline
sales
38
pipeline
-


-
19
revenue management
revenue
21
management
34


-
18
innovation management
innovation
21
management
34


-
18
sales techniques
sales
38
techniques
17


-
18
brand positioning
brand
36
positioning
-


-
18
brand promotion
brand
36
promotion
-


-
18
digital assets
digital
50
assets
4


-
18
target audiences
target
33
audiences
20


-
18
search engine optimization
search
-
engine
-
optimization
35
18
campaign optimization
campaign
-
optimization
35


-
18
digital transformation
digital
50
transformation
2


-
17
digital presence
digital
50
presence
2


-
17
campaign management
campaign
-
management
34


-
17
change management
change
-
management
34


-
17
sales forecasting
sales
38
forecasting
12


-
17
target market
target
33
market
-


-
17
machine learning
machine
9
learning
39


-
16
sales objectives
sales
38
objectives
10


-
16
technical documentation
technical
42
documentation
6


-
16
funnel optimization
funnel
12
optimization
35


-
16
content management
content
12
management
34


-
15
conversion rate optimization
conversion
11
rate
-
optimization
35
15
brand messaging
brand
36
messaging
10


-
15
high hours
high
42
hours
2


-
15
stakeholder engagement
stakeholder
-
engagement
29


-
15
consumer behavior
consumer
34
behavior
9


-
14
python programming
python
28
programming
-


-
14
market trends
market
-
trends
28


-
14
user engagement
user
13
engagement
29


-
14
sales enablement
sales
38
enablement
4


-
14
database management
database
8
management
34


-
14
sales cycle
sales
38
cycle
1


-
13
ecommerce optimization
ecommerce
4
optimization
35


-
13
enterprise software
enterprise
15
software
23


-
13
brand awareness
brand
36
awareness
1


-
12
revenue targets
revenue
21
targets
-


-
11
operational efficiency
operational
18
efficiency
13


-
10
cloud infrastructure
cloud
10
infrastructure
21


-
10
campaign execution
campaign
-
execution
19


-
10
client consulting
client
-
consulting
19


-
10
operational strategies
operational
18
strategies
-


-
9
predictive modeling
predictive
17
modeling
-


-
9
CRM systems
CRM
4
systems
20


-
8
competitive landscape
competitive
20
landscape
2


-
7
user acquisition
user
13
acquisition
9


-
7
demand generation
demand
13
generation
7


-
7
market share
market
-
share
13


-
7
market intelligence
market
-
intelligence
12


-
6
content strategies
content
12
strategies
-


-
6
market segmentation
market
-
segmentation
11


-
6
segmentation strategies
segmentation
11
strategies
-


-
6
content creation
content
12
creation
4


-
5
market research
market
-
research
10


-
5
healthcare compliance
healthcare
9
compliance
6


-
5
content distribution
content
12
distribution
2


-
5
online presence
online
12
presence
2


-
5
audio streaming
audio
11
streaming
3


-
5
SEO strategies
SEO
7
strategies
-


-
4
subscription services
subscription
7
services
-


-
4
leads generation
leads
-
generation
7


-
4
promotional strategies
promotional
5
strategies
-


-
3
commercial strategies
commercial
3
strategies
-


-
2
project oversight
project
-
oversight
1


-
1
results-driven strategies
results-driven
-
strategies
-


-
0
market strategies
market
-
strategies
-


-
0
market positioning
market
-
positioning
-


-
0
market opportunities
market
-
opportunities
-


-
0
market dynamics
market
-
dynamics
-


-
0
market expansion
market
-
expansion
-


-
0
market penetration
market
-
penetration
-


-
0





main term
occurrs
jobs w/ term
% of jobs
avg occurrs
marketing
616
69
57.5
5.9
data
485
40
100
12.1
analytics
339
40
100
8.5
team
321
73
91.25
4.3
experience
301
58
48.33
3.1
business
241
49
61.25
3.7
work
239
71
59.17
2.8
drive
181
85
70.83
2
insights
137
43
53.75
2.2
across
136
37
92.5
3.7
role
133
51
63.75
2.2
lead
131
58
36.25
1.9
strategy
129
52
65
2.5
years
124
61
76.25
1.9
customer
123
48
60
2.4
reporting
115
60
37.5
1.4
measurement
115
21
52.5
5.5
skills
111
45
56.25
1.8
clients
106
17
21.25
6.2
including
100
56
35
1.4
pay
100
54
33.75
1.5
tools
98
38
47.5
1.9
models
96
56
46.67
1.7
leadership
96
33
82.5
2.9
based
96
60
75
1.6
provide
93
62
38.75
1.4
develop
92
55
45.83
1.6
process
92
53
33.13
1.4
company
92
42
52.5
2
support
91
49
30.63
1.3
range
90
52
43.33
1.4
ability
90
38
47.5
1.9
performance
89
30
75
3
analysis
88
40
50
1.9
benefits
85
37
46.25
1.8
opportunity
85
53
66.25
1.6
make
84
54
33.75
1.4
position
83
40
33.33
1.5
partner
79
52
43.33
1.4
amazon
78
8
20
9.8
program
78
36
30
2
manage
77
49
30.63
1.3
strong
77
35
87.5
2.2
time
77
31
38.75
1.8
job
76
38
47.5
1.7
solutions
75
33
41.25
2
need
72
49
40.83
1.5
help
72
35
29.17
1.6
product
70
32
40
2.1
key
69
35
43.75
1.5
decisions
68
41
51.25
1.6
build
66
46
38.33
1.4
best
66
33
82.5
2
leaders
66
35
43.75
2
service
65
33
41.25
2.2
employees
65
45
56.25
1.5
strategic
65
27
67.5
2.4
compensation
63
25
62.5
2.5
growth
62
23
57.5
2.7
stakeholders
61
32
40
1.5
ovative
60
4
10
15
complex
60
34
85
1.8
understanding
58
41
51.25
1.4
media
58
19
47.5
3.1
disability
57
37
46.25
1.4
ensure
56
39
32.5
1.3
design
56
35
21.88
1.3
use
56
35
29.17
1.5
deliver
55
36
22.5
1.3
knowledge
55
30
75
1.8
science
55
26
32.5
1.6
advanced
54
33
41.25
1.6
health
54
15
37.5
3.6
offer
54
48
30
1.1
may
53
27
67.5
2
required
52
38
23.75
1.2
focus
52
39
24.38
1.2
new
52
28
70
1.9
com
51
24
60
2.1
us
51
28
70
1.8
salary
50
30
37.5
1.5
internal
50
17
42.5
2.9
digital
50
25
62.5
2
environment
49
31
38.75
1.3
development
49
27
67.5
1.8
plan
48
33
20.63
1.3
status
48
25
62.5
1.9
senior
48
28
70
1.7
related
48
32
80
1.5
adobe
47
15
37.5
3.1
create
46
37
23.13
1.1
impact
46
31
25.83
1.3
organization
46
30
37.5
1.3
culture
46
26
32.5
1.4
projects
45
33
41.25
1.4
visualization
45
27
33.75
1.6
individual
45
30
37.5
1.4
0
45
20
50
2.3
preferred
45
34
42.5
1.5
channels
45
27
33.75
1.6
please
45
24
30
1.5
level
45
33
41.25
1.4
identify
45
35
43.75
1.3
platforms
44
31
38.75
1.4
show
44
40
100
1.1
results
44
30
37.5
1.3
information
44
26
65
1.7
performing
44
29
18.13
1.4
cross
43
20
50
2.2
technology
43
32
40
1.3
qualifications
43
29
36.25
1.3
multiple
43
24
60
1.8
less
43
40
100
1.1
high
42
25
62.5
1.7
initiatives
42
19
23.75
1.6
technical
42
18
45
2.3
accommodation
42
32
40
1.3
campaigns
41
26
32.5
1.5
life
40
28
35
1.4
improve
40
27
22.5
1.2
actionable
40
23
57.5
1.7
efforts
39
19
47.5
2.1
learning
39
27
33.75
1.4
analytical
39
25
62.5
1.6
implement
39
30
25
1.2
thinking
38
32
26.67
1.2
communication
38
30
37.5
1.6
testing
38
31
25.83
1.2
industry
38
26
32.5
1.3
sales
38
14
35
2.7
gender
38
22
55
1.7
within
38
22
55
1.7
optimize
37
27
22.5
1.2
group
37
14
17.5
2.4
location
37
30
37.5
1.3
applicants
37
28
35
1.2
part
37
25
62.5
1.5
expertise
37
25
62.5
1.5
degree
37
23
57.5
1.6
functional
37
21
52.5
1.8
sets
37
33
27.5
1.1
grow
36
23
28.75
1.6
brand
36
22
18.33
1.4
communicate
36
28
23.33
1.2
operations
36
19
23.75
1.5
workplace
36
23
28.75
1.3
you’ll
36
11
27.5
3.3
well
36
21
52.5
1.7
etc
36
24
60
1.5
bonus
36
20
25
1.4
people
35
20
50
1.8
sql
35
31
77.5
1.1
optimization
35
19
23.75
2.4
apply
35
30
18.75
1.1
various
35
19
47.5
1.8
we’re
34
16
40
2.1
state
34
26
32.5
1.3
music
34
4
10
8.5
vision
34
24
60
1.4
goals
34
25
31.25
1.2
management
34
20
50
1.7
hire
34
27
33.75
1.3
days
34
20
25
1.7
consumer
34
11
13.75
2.3
collaborate
34
23
19.17
1.2
leverage
33
25
15.63
1.2
scaled
33
20
16.67
2
target
33
23
14.38
1.5
candidate
33
24
30
1.3
financial
33
20
50
1.7
medical
32
22
55
1.5
dashboards
32
18
45
1.8
employment
32
20
50
1.6
full
32
21
52.5
1.5
inclusive
32
20
50
1.6
structured
32
19
15.83
1.7
protected
32
20
25
1.3
self
32
18
22.5
1.4
responsibilities
31
28
70
1.1
director
31
22
27.5
1.3
engineering
31
25
31.25
1.5
analysts
31
21
26.25
1.3
laws
31
23
28.75
1.4
problems
31
23
28.75
1.3
access
31
15
37.5
2.1
value
30
23
28.75
1.3
solving
30
24
15
1.1
measure
30
23
28.75
1.3
practices
30
20
25
1.6
closely
30
20
50
1.5
mix
30
14
35
2.1
track
29
21
26.25
1.3
maintain
29
19
23.75
1.5
insurance
29
12
30
2.4
deep
29
18
45
1.6
equal
29
25
62.5
1.2
responsible
29
22
55
1.3
engagement
29
21
26.25
1.2
career
28
24
30
1.3
record
28
20
25
1.4
trends
28
20
50
1.4
python
28
24
60
1.2
effectiveness
28
19
47.5
1.5
translate
28
23
19.17
1.1
employer
27
24
60
1.1
large
27
19
47.5
1.4
influence
27
22
18.33
1.2
executive
27
21
26.25
1.3
recommendations
27
19
47.5
1.4
excellent
27
23
57.5
1.2
committed
27
22
55
1.2
like
27
18
45
1.5
proven
26
18
22.5
1.2
identity
25
25
31.25
1
total
25
17
42.5
1.5
relevant
25
20
50
1.3
reasonable
25
13
32.5
1.9
capabilities
25
19
23.75
1.3
journey
25
15
18.75
1.6
improvement
25
19
23.75
1.4
power
25
21
26.25
1.1
office
25
18
22.5
1.2
national
25
23
57.5
1.1
foster
25
23
14.38
1.1
align
25
19
11.88
1.3
collaboration
25
19
47.5
1.3
geographic
25
11
27.5
2.3
members
24
17
21.25
1.5
areas
24
13
16.25
2.9
expert
24
15
18.75
1.6
bi
24
18
45
1.3
analyze
24
23
19.17
1
action
24
12
15
1.8
also
24
19
47.5
1.3
race
24
23
57.5
1
others
24
13
32.5
1.8
orientation
24
24
60
1
tableau
24
22
55
1.1
google
24
18
45
1.3
equity
23
16
40
1.4
join
23
19
23.75
1.1
inform
23
20
12.5
1.1
https
23
12
15
1.6
incentives
23
16
20
1.5
sexual
23
23
57.5
1
statistical
23
15
37.5
1.5
origin
23
22
55
1
changing
23
18
15
1.2
establish
23
21
17.5
1
empowering
23
22
13.75
1.1
veteran
23
21
26.25
1.5
software
23
16
40
1.4
trust
22
16
13.33
1.2
define
22
20
12.5
1
global
22
15
37.5
1.5
factors
22
17
42.5
1.3
investment
22
19
23.75
1.4
effectively
22
17
42.5
1.3
attribution
22
17
42.5
1.3
world
22
17
42.5
1.3
methodologies
22
17
21.25
1.2
demonstrated
22
18
11.25
1.3
connect
21
17
10.63
1.1
innovative
21
16
40
1.3
revenue
21
6
15
3.5
one
21
14
17.5
1.3
diverse
21
16
40
1.3
applicable
21
14
35
1.5
metrics
21
15
37.5
1.4
innovation
21
13
16.25
1.4
compelling
21
18
45
1.2
application
21
17
21.25
1.4
annual
21
14
35
1.5
listed
21
15
12.5
1.4
matter
21
13
16.25
1.6
age
21
20
50
1.1
infrastructure
21
11
27.5
1.9
request
21
19
15.83
1.1
field
21
16
20
1.2
policy
21
17
21.25
1.2
enhance
20
17
14.17
1.1
education
20
13
32.5
1.5
competitive
20
13
32.5
1.5
together
20
15
37.5
1.3
enabling
20
19
11.88
1
find
20
16
13.33
1.1
systems
20
17
21.25
1.1
audiences
20
13
16.25
1.7
term
20
12
15
1.4
seeking
20
18
22.5
1.1
execution
19
10
25
1.9
challenges
19
18
15
1
statistics
19
19
23.75
1
success
19
15
37.5
1.3
functions
19
19
15.83
1
approach
19
16
20
1.2
visit
19
12
15
1.3
critical
19
15
37.5
1.3
talent
19
13
16.25
1.3
10
19
18
45
1.1
consulting
19
14
17.5
1.2
future
19
15
37.5
1.3
relationships
18
14
17.5
1.3
ways
18
17
21.25
1.1
details
18
17
14.17
1.1
reflects
18
17
21.25
1.1
cost
18
14
17.5
1.2
bring
18
15
18.75
1.2
outcomes
18
15
18.75
1.1
fast
18
13
32.5
1.4
operational
18
12
30
1.5
requirements
18
14
17.5
1.2
external
18
16
40
1.1
roi
18
16
40
1.1
minimum
18
11
27.5
1.6
tech
18
13
32.5
1.4
non
18
14
35
1.3
top
18
10
25
1.8
ua
18
2
5
9
serve
18
14
17.5
1.6
0
18
9
22.5
2
religion
17
16
40
1.1
professional
17
16
20
1
vary
17
16
13.33
1
roadmap
17
13
32.5
1.3
martech
17
4
10
4.3
excellence
17
12
30
1.4
www
17
11
27.5
1.5
increase
17
15
12.5
1.1
predictive
17
13
32.5
1.3
exceptional
17
14
35
1.2
transform
17
16
20
1
duties
17
9
11.25
1.5
guardant
17
2
5
8.5
care
17
10
12.5
1.4
present
17
15
12.5
1.1
depending
17
17
14.17
1
thredup
17
1
2.5
17
successful
17
14
35
1.2
dynamic
17
15
18.75
1.1
thrive
17
13
10.83
1.1
dental
17
13
32.5
1.3
mission
17
12
30
1.4
automated
17
12
10
1.4
basis
17
17
42.5
1
techniques
17
10
25
1.7
manager
16
11
13.75
1.3
evolve
16
11
13.75
1.5
communities
16
14
17.5
1.2
cvs
16
8
10
1.8
person
16
11
13.75
1.3
recognized
16
11
13.75
1.4
transparency
16
10
25
1.6
subject
16
11
27.5
1.5
proficiency
16
15
37.5
1.1
retail
16
6
15
2.7
address
16
13
16.25
1.1
quality
16
13
32.5
1.2
email
16
13
16.25
1.1
clear
16
14
35
1.1
multi
16
15
37.5
1.1
en
16
10
25
1.6
package
16
16
20
1
web
16
12
30
1.3
forward
16
8
20
2
via
16
14
35
1.1
guide
15
13
10.83
1.4
recruiting
15
14
11.67
1
description
15
13
32.5
1.2
highly
15
10
25
1.5
interact
15
11
13.75
1.3
addition
15
14
35
1.1
collaborative
15
13
32.5
1.2
enterprise
15
12
15
1.2
patient
15
8
10
1.9
eligible
15
9
22.5
1.7
finance
15
12
15
1.1
personalized
15
11
13.75
1.2
comprehensive
15
11
27.5
1.4
presentation
15
10
12.5
1.4
hands
15
16
20
1.4
site
15
13
16.25
1.5
looking
15
10
12.5
1.3
automation
15
12
15
1.1
highest
14
14
35
1
background
14
10
12.5
1.3
discriminate
14
14
17.5
1
unique
14
9
22.5
1.6
conditions
14
11
13.75
1.2
additional
14
11
27.5
1.3
everyone
14
12
30
1.2
advertising
14
6
15
2.3
stock
14
8
20
1.8
several
14
14
35
1
salesforce
14
7
17.5
2
achieve
14
13
32.5
1.1
color
14
14
35
1
believe
14
12
30
1.2
flexible
14
12
30
1.2
important
14
9
22.5
1.6
ad
14
11
27.5
1.3
kpis
14
12
30
1.2
remote
14
7
17.5
2
must
14
11
27.5
1.3
ideal
14
12
30
1.2
401k
14
13
32.5
1.1
creators
14
5
6.25
2.1
rewarding
13
13
8.13
1
sources
13
12
10
1
share
13
12
7.5
1.1
get
13
13
10.83
1
resources
13
10
12.5
1.3
country
13
11
13.75
1.3
standard
13
9
11.25
1.3
engage
13
12
10
1
publishing
13
3
2.5
4.3
view
13
13
16.25
1
user
13
10
12.5
1.3
department
13
10
12.5
1.2
play
13
12
10
1
generating
13
13
8.13
1
agencies
13
12
15
1.1
aveva
13
1
2.5
13
leave
13
12
30
1.1
directly
13
13
32.5
1
better
13
12
30
1.1
united
13
11
27.5
1.2
monthly
13
8
20
1.6
findings
13
9
22.5
1.4
efficiency
13
11
13.75
1.1
posted
13
13
16.25
1
demand
13
11
27.5
1.2
events
13
7
17.5
1.9
sex
13
13
32.5
1
mentor
13
12
30
1.1
local
13
11
27.5
1.2
paced
13
13
16.25
1
first
13
12
30
1.1
want
13
13
16.25
1
bachelor’s
13
13
32.5
1
funnel
12
8
20
1.5
real
12
11
27.5
1.1
free
12
8
10
1.3
take
12
12
10
1
analytic
12
11
27.5
1.1
love
12
10
12.5
1.1
foundation
12
10
25
1.2
federal
12
10
25
1.2
forecasting
12
8
6.67
1.3
match
12
8
10
1.4
intelligence
12
10
25
1.2
account
12
9
11.25
1.2
scientists
12
10
12.5
1.2
specific
12
11
27.5
1.1
meet
12
11
27.5
1.1
pfizer
12
1
2.5
12
qualtrics
12
1
2.5
12
long
12
10
25
1.2
become
12
12
15
1
ceo
12
6
15
2
1password
12
1
2.5
12
continuous
12
9
22.5
1.3
forms
12
10
8.33
1.3
rates
12
8
10
1.5
essential
12
11
13.75
1.1
unit
12
9
11.25
1.4
online
12
11
27.5
1.1
basic
12
11
27.5
1.1
execute
12
12
15
1
give
12
11
9.17
1.1
content
12
11
27.5
1.1
oriented
12
10
25
1.2
spotter
12
1
2.5
12
family
12
8
10
1.3
shape
11
9
7.5
1.1
open
11
7
8.75
1.3
millions
11
10
12.5
1.1
contribute
11
7
8.75
1.4
training
11
11
9.17
1
regard
11
11
13.75
1
reach
11
10
12.5
1.1
potential
11
8
20
1.4
award
11
7
8.75
1.9
participate
11
11
13.75
1
written
11
7
8.75
1.5
qualified
11
10
12.5
1.1
integrating
11
8
5
1.3
interview
11
10
12.5
1.1
oversee
11
9
11.25
1.1
conversion
11
5
12.5
2.2
stay
11
10
12.5
1.1
possible
11
10
25
1.1
audio
11
5
12.5
2.2
next
11
10
25
1.1
lowest
11
8
20
1.4
website
11
7
17.5
1.6
move
11
7
17.5
1.6
core
11
10
25
1.1
social
11
6
15
1.8
available
11
8
20
1.4
segmentation
11
8
20
1.4
without
11
11
27.5
1
passion
11
9
22.5
1.2
contact
11
11
13.75
1
class
11
6
15
1.8
accuracy
11
10
25
1.1
situations
10
6
15
1.7
act
10
5
4.17
1.6
exciting
10
9
7.5
1.1
scope
10
10
12.5
1
touch
10
4
10
2.5
inspire
10
10
12.5
1
put
10
6
7.5
1.4
existing
10
10
12.5
1
datasets
10
8
20
1.3
sign
10
9
11.25
1.1
b2b
10
7
17.5
1.4
coverage
10
5
12.5
2
stack
10
9
7.5
1.1
looker
10
9
22.5
1.1
connections
10
7
8.75
1.3
receive
10
7
8.75
1.5
domain
10
7
8.75
1.6
different
10
9
22.5
1.1
travel
10
8
20
1.3
pets
10
3
3.75
3.8
anticipate
10
10
8.33
1
great
10
10
25
1
tangible
10
5
12.5
2
ongoing
10
5
12.5
2
americas
10
7
8.75
1.8
utilize
10
8
6.67
1.7
objectives
10
9
22.5
1.1
extended
10
9
7.5
1.3
labor
10
10
25
1
research
10
8
20
1.3
easy
10
8
20
1.3
zendesk
10
1
2.5
10
purpose
10
6
15
1.7
monitor
10
9
11.25
1.1
assess
10
6
7.5
1.4
know
10
7
8.75
1.3
priorities
10
9
11.25
1.1
payments
10
8
20
1.3
collection
10
8
20
1.3
implementation
10
7
17.5
1.4
hybrid
10
9
22.5
1.1
impactful
10
9
22.5
1.1
cloud
10
6
15
1.7
sellers
10
4
10
2.5
centric
10
10
25
1
organizational
10
7
17.5
1.4
messaging
10
8
10
1.1
onboarding
10
6
15
1.7
machine
9
6
15
1.5
physical
9
7
17.5
1.3
touchpoints
9
7
17.5
1.3
petco
9
1
2.5
9
consider
9
9
11.25
1
acquisition
9
8
20
1.1
crucial
9
9
22.5
1
enjoy
9
8
10
1.1
indicators
9
7
17.5
1.3
every
9
8
20
1.1
owned
9
9
11.25
1
home
9
9
22.5
1
staff
9
6
7.5
1.3
budget
9
7
5.83
1.1
behavior
9
10
12.5
0.8
categories
9
8
10
1.2
coaching
9
8
10
1.1
story
9
9
11.25
1
order
9
9
11.25
1
sound
9
5
12.5
1.8
commission
9
6
7.5
1.4
succeed
9
5
12.5
1.8
number
9
9
22.5
1
saas
9
9
22.5
1
hcp
9
3
7.5
3
integrity
9
7
17.5
1.3
paylocity
9
1
2.5
9
fastest
9
9
22.5
1
veeqo
9
3
7.5
3
direction
9
9
22.5
1
consideration
9
9
22.5
1
eight
9
5
12.5
1.8
current
9
8
20
1.1
healthcare
9
5
12.5
1.8
expression
9
9
22.5
1
live
9
6
15
1.5
creative
9
6
15
1.5
direct
9
6
15
1.5
hoc
9
7
17.5
1.3
extract
9
6
7.5
1.3
alignment
9
8
20
1.1
conduct
9
9
7.5
1
retain
9
9
11.25
1
plus
9
6
15
1.5
remain
9
9
11.25
1
hear
9
8
6.67
1.3
right
8
7
8.75
1.1
good
8
5
6.25
1.4
operating
8
8
5
1
ideas
8
6
7.5
1.2
end
8
6
7.5
1.5
commitment
8
5
6.25
1.4
frameworks
8
8
10
1
options
8
8
10
1
materials
8
5
6.25
2.5
represents
8
8
10
1
database
8
5
6.25
1.5
interpret
8
8
6.67
1
holidays
8
7
8.75
1.1
vps
8
4
10
2
actual
8
8
20
1
human
8
6
15
1.3
always
8
8
20
1
holistic
8
7
17.5
1.1
big
8
8
20
1
place
8
5
12.5
1.6
methods
8
7
17.5
1.1
governance
8
6
15
1.3
least
8
5
12.5
1.6
llc
8
8
20
1
scalable
8
4
10
2
three
8
7
17.5
1.1
depth
8
6
15
1.3
activation
8
4
10
2
storytelling
8
8
20
1
motivated
8
5
12.5
1.6
ovative’s
8
4
10
2
around
8
7
17.5
1.1
issues
8
8
20
1
week
8
6
15
1.3
diversity
8
6
15
1.3
tripadvisor
8
1
2.5
8
review
8
8
20
1
mta
8
4
10
2
mmm
8
4
10
2
surrounded
8
4
10
2
seamless
8
8
20
1
startup
8
6
7.5
2
overview
8
6
15
1.3
languages
8
7
8.75
1.1
sophisticated
8
5
12.5
1.6
parental
8
8
20
1
expected
8
6
7.5
1.2
marital
8
8
20
1
center
8
6
7.5
1.3
integration
8
6
7.5
1.2
return
8
8
20
1
experiments
8
8
20
1
limited
8
8
20
1
personnel
8
2
5
4
dependent
8
8
20
1
prior
8
6
15
1.3
economics
8
8
20
1
activities
7
6
7.5
1.1
sit
7
7
8.75
1
colleagues
7
7
8.75
1
facing
7
7
8.75
1
tell
7
7
8.75
1
come
7
7
5.83
1
progress
7
7
8.75
1
maximize
7
7
8.75
1
artists
7
5
6.25
1.3
accelerate
7
6
7.5
1.2
determined
7
7
8.75
1
assisting
7
7
8.75
1
ecosystem
7
5
6.25
1.5
adjustment
7
7
8.75
1
go
7
5
4.17
1.3
start
7
6
5
1.3
allowing
7
7
8.75
1
risk
7
5
6.25
1.3
expansions
7
5
6.25
2
refine
7
7
8.75
1
pipelines
7
7
8.75
1
driver
7
6
7.5
1.3
keep
7
7
4.38
1
contribution
7
7
8.75
1
recommended
7
5
4.17
1.7
follow
7
7
8.75
1
id
7
7
17.5
1
skilled
7
6
15
1.2
commerce
7
4
10
1.8
fair
7
8
20
0.9
military
7
7
17.5
1
wellness
7
4
10
1.8
northern
7
1
2.5
7
prospective
7
7
17.5
1
master’s
7
7
17.5
1
able
7
7
17.5
1
acumen
7
7
17.5
1
narratives
7
6
15
1.2
generous
7
4
10
1.8
eligibility
7
4
10
1.8
generation
7
5
12.5
1.4
mental
7
7
17.5
1
strive
7
7
17.5
1
heart
7
3
7.5
2.3
fit
7
6
15
1.2
along
7
7
17.5
1
subscription
7
5
12.5
1.4
many
7
5
12.5
1.4
primary
7
5
12.5
1.4
aboutamazon
7
7
17.5
1
retention
7
7
17.5
1
robust
7
7
17.5
1
quantitative
7
6
15
1.2
mathematics
7
7
17.5
1
multivariate
7
5
12.5
1.4
outside
7
7
17.5
1
600
7
4
10
1.8
thrivent
7
1
2.5
7
100
7
6
15
1.2
legally
7
7
17.5
1
seo
7
3
7.5
2.3
filled
7
7
17.5
1
mba
7
6
15
1.2
principles
7
5
12.5
1.4
significant
7
7
17.5
1
partnership
7
6
7.5
1.1
party
7
7
17.5
1
company’s
7
4
10
1.8
abbott
7
1
2.5
7
portfolio
7
7
17.5
1
computer
7
7
17.5
1
privacy
7
4
10
1.8
proprietary
7
6
15
1.2
flexibility
7
6
15
1.2
mindset
7
7
17.5
1
ai
7
5
12.5
1.4
you’re
7
7
17.5
1
inc
7
7
17.5
1
ca
7
5
12.5
1.4
daily
7
6
15
1.2
single
7
7
17.5
1
tasks
6
4
5
1.3
metabase
6
3
7.5
2
gaps
6
6
7.5
1
shipping
6
6
7.5
1
difference
6
5
6.25
1.3
balance
6
6
7.5
1
champion
6
6
7.5
1
bachelors
6
18
22.5
0.8
per
6
6
15
1
resides
6
6
5
1
characteristics
6
6
7.5
1
region
6
6
7.5
1
studio
6
5
6.25
1.2
algorithms
6
5
6.25
1.1
mining
6
5
6.25
1.1
moments
6
6
7.5
1
display
6
4
5
1.5
purchase
6
5
6.25
1.2
encouraged
6
6
7.5
1
segments
6
5
6.25
1.1
simplify
6
6
7.5
1
back
6
6
7.5
1
spaces
6
6
7.5
1
songs
6
6
7.5
1
liaising
6
6
7.5
1
screening
6
4
5
1.3
complete
6
6
7.5
1
components
6
6
7.5
1
answer
6
5
6.25
1.1
spending
6
6
7.5
1
often
6
5
12.5
1.2
inclusion
6
5
12.5
1.2
date
6
6
15
1
short
6
4
10
1.5
150
6
6
15
1
400
6
4
10
1.5
constantly
6
4
10
1.5
synthesize
6
6
15
1
vacation
6
6
15
1
hard
6
5
12.5
1.2
wide
6
5
12.5
1.2
floor
6
6
15
1
offerings
6
6
15
1
wage
6
3
7.5
2
variety
6
5
12.5
1.2
eeo
6
5
12.5
1.2
macmillan
6
1
2.5
6
vp
6
6
15
1
sr
6
6
15
1
facebook
6
5
12.5
1.2
thrivent’s
6
1
2.5
6
retirement
6
6
15
1
interpersonal
6
6
15
1
actively
6
6
15
1
worldwide
6
5
12.5
1.2
passionate
6
5
12.5
1.2
proud
6
6
15
1
20
6
5
12.5
1.2
hourly
6
4
10
1.5
compliance
6
6
15
1
regulations
6
5
12.5
1.2
cdp
6
2
5
3
hr
6
2
5
3
excel
6
5
12.5
1.2
today
6
4
10
1.5
800
6
6
15
1
evaluate
6
4
10
1.5
equivalent
6
6
15
1
quicksite
6
3
7.5
2
entertainment
6
2
5
3
inside
6
6
15
1
allocation
6
4
10
1.5
mastermind
6
1
2.5
6
safely
6
4
10
1.5
quickly
6
6
15
1
devices
6
4
5
1.3
what’s
6
3
7.5
2
regulatory
6
4
10
1.5
smb
6
2
5
3
prioritize
6
4
10
1.5
clean
6
6
15
1
would
6
6
15
1
concepts
6
6
15
1
fully
6
5
12.5
1.2
cutting
6
5
12.5
1.2
edge
6
5
12.5
1.2
complicated
6
6
15
1
documentation
6
4
10
1.5
snowflake
6
6
15
1
communicator
6
6
15
1
api
6
3
7.5
2
latest
6
6
15
1
rapidly
6
6
15
1
forefront
6
6
15
1
familiarity
6
6
15
1
3rd
6
6
15
1
overall
6
6
15
1
broad
6
2
5
3
meaningful
6
5
12.5
1.2
outstanding
6
6
15
1
immediate
6
5
12.5
1.2
pto
6
7
17.5
0.9
throughout
6
5
12.5
1.2
check
6
4
5
1.5
books
5
2
2.5
2.5
agile
5
3
7.5
1.7
won’t
5
5
12.5
1
point
5
5
6.25
1
central
5
3
7.5
1.7
name
5
4
5
1.2
craft
5
5
4.17
1
respect
5
5
6.25
1
regularly
5
5
12.5
1
peer
5
4
5
1.3
document
5
5
6.25
1
attract
5
5
6.25
1
stores
5
5
6.25
1
stage
5
4
5
1.3
estimate
5
5
6.25
1
advise
5
5
6.25
1
selected
5
5
4.17
1
tailoring
5
5
4.17
1
billion
5
3
3.75
1.8
harness
5
5
6.25
1
launch
5
4
5
1.2
perspective
5
5
6.25
1
providers
5
5
6.25
0.9
theory
5
3
3.75
1.5
headquarters
5
5
6.25
1
forums
5
5
6.25
1
supervisors
5
3
3.75
1.5
complexities
5
5
6.25
1
capture
5
5
6.25
1
case
5
3
3.75
1.5
possess
5
5
6.25
1
participation
5
2
5
2.5
elements
5
5
12.5
1
departmental
5
2
5
2.5
lifecycle
5
3
7.5
1.7
reimbursement
5
4
10
1.3
savings
5
5
12.5
1
close
5
5
12.5
1
fun
5
5
12.5
1
adoption
5
3
7.5
1.7
running
5
5
12.5
1
continually
5
5
12.5
1
transparent
5
5
12.5
1
experimentation
5
5
12.5
1
assistance
5
4
10
1.3
accordance
5
5
12.5
1
size
5
5
12.5
1
team’s
5
5
12.5
1
premier
5
5
12.5
1
cro
5
1
2.5
5
300
5
5
12.5
1
app
5
5
12.5
1
de
5
1
2.5
5
city
5
5
12.5
1
accurately
5
5
12.5
1
private
5
5
12.5
1
cancer
5
1
2.5
5
manipulation
5
5
12.5
1
five
5
5
12.5
1
promotional
5
3
7.5
1.7
things
5
4
10
1.3
pride
5
5
12.5
1
xactly
5
1
2.5
5
broader
5
4
10
1.3
smart
5
5
12.5
1
turning
5
5
12.5
1
sick
5
5
12.5
1
advertisers
5
3
7.5
1.7
strengthen
5
5
12.5
1
questions
5
5
12.5
1
effective
5
5
12.5
1
appropriate
5
4
10
1.3
tactics
5
3
7.5
1.7
genetic
5
5
12.5
1
accessible
5
5
12.5
1
emerging
5
5
12.5
1
personal
5
4
10
1.3
importance
5
5
12.5
1
maximum
5
5
12.5
1
proficient
5
5
12.5
1
amazonians
5
5
12.5
1
world’s
5
3
7.5
1.7
401
5
5
12.5
1
functionally
5
5
12.5
1
minneapolis
5
5
12.5
1
500
5
5
12.5
1
etl
5
5
12.5
1
linear
5
5
12.5
1
confidence
5
5
12.5
1
equipment
5
5
12.5
1
mobile
5
5
12.5
1
onsite
5
3
7.5
1.7
welcome
5
3
7.5
1.7
viq
5
5
12.5
1
resale
5
1
2.5
5
isn’t
5
5
12.5
1
unlock
5
4
10
1.3
sabbatical
5
5
12.5
1
safe
5
5
12.5
1
scripting
5
5
12.5
1
independent
5
5
12.5
1




job title
item type
item value
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Design, build, and maintain data infrastructure
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Create automated reporting and dashboards
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Design and measure experiments
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Execute complex analysis to support business functions
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop and maintain automated, user-friendly systems, reports, APIs, and dashboards
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Partner with cross-functional teams to develop and implement KPIs and process solutions
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Drive data integration projects
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Extract insights from large and complicated data sets
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Prototype new marketing solutions
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Perform ad hoc investigations for future improvements
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Own ongoing metrics, analyses, and dashboards
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop queries and visualizations for ad hoc requests and ongoing reporting
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Improve reporting and analysis processes
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Identify performance gaps and optimization opportunities
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Collaborate to build scalable data infrastructure
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Support central BI team in global marketing reporting
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Promote best practices in ETL and mentor team members
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Enterprise analytics
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Digital advertising solutions
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing content personalization
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Business Intelligence (BI)
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
ETL processes
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
KPI development
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Amazon Advertising ecosystem
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Data integrity and documentation standards
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
SQL programming
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Data extraction, transformation, and cleaning
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Scripting for automation
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Advanced SQL skills
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Statistical analytics
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Programming in R, Python, Ruby, or similar languages
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Analytical and statistical rigor
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Problem solving
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Communication of insights and recommendations
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to translate between data and business needs
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Managing, analyzing, and communicating results to senior leadership
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Operational excellence practices
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Technical documentation guidance
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Data-driven decision making
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Adoption of reporting and analysis best practices
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Lead and manage teams of marketing measurement experts
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Develop individual team leaders and support career growth
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Drive the Measurement Solutions team strategy
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Collaborate across internal teams to achieve goals
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Evolve Measurement skills, knowledge, toolset, product offerings, and culture
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Review and improve client services and strategies
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Provide senior leadership during key client interactions
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Support business development and refine scopes of work
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Handle complex analytics requests and provide structured solutions
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Focus on key aspects to advance client's business
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Consult and advise to drive expansions with clients
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Develop expertise in marketing measurement technology
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Connect client data and business trends to provide insights
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Link measurement work to client business models and goals
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Participate in leadership forums and interact with company leadership
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Lead strategic internal initiatives and problem-solving
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Contribute to Ovative’s strategy development and planning
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Marketing measurement including MMM and MTA models
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Digital marketing analytics
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Marketing industry knowledge
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Understanding of media tests and experimentation
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Client engagement and services improvement
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Marketing and media activation
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Enterprise Marketing Return (EMR) methodology
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Managing large data sets
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Developing measurement strategies
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Implementing MMM and MTA solutions
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Generating standard and ad hoc reporting
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Analyzing data for insights and action
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Experience with digital marketing analytics software like Adobe Analytics, Google Analytics, ViQ
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Experience with web analytics data
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Team leadership and empowering others
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Excellent communication skills
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Collaboration with multiple stakeholders and partners
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Ability to partner with executive leaders
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Thriving in ambiguous situations
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Self-driven and action-oriented
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Decision-making
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Structured thinking and problem-solving
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Innovative thinking
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Ability to translate complex data into actionable insights
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Lead analytics and insights efforts for Amazon Music Engagement Marketing
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Define and deliver reporting and visualization for internal business leaders
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Drive self-service solutions for senior business stakeholders
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Increase business and team's effectiveness using analytical insights
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Understand the streaming music industry and subscription business model
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Collaborate with Amazon entertainment and subscription businesses analytics and science teams
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Educate and evangelize on analytics, insights, and measurement across internal teams
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Develop analytics roadmap and direction for paid marketing projects
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Work closely with marketing stakeholders to deliver analytics solutions
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Contribute to analytics and science offerings with white papers and models
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Collaborate with a full-stack team of business intelligence engineers, data engineers, and scientists
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Streaming music industry knowledge
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Subscription business model familiarity
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Understanding of Amazon Music's service tiers
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Knowledge of Amazon’s internal partners across Prime, devices, and media
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Experience with AWS technologies
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Knowledge of design of experiments and statistical analysis
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Information retrieval, data science, machine learning, and data mining concepts
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Marketing & Growth analytics in the audio entertainment service domain
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
quantitative_skill
SQL for data extraction, transformation, and cleaning
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
quantitative_skill
Scripting for automation with Python
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
quantitative_skill
Advanced SQL skills
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
quantitative_skill
Data analysis and statistical analysis
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
quantitative_skill
Building data pipelines and self-service analytics
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
quantitative_skill
Development of predictive models
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Ability to prioritize across multiple stakeholders and projects
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Capability to work in a fast-paced, dynamic environment
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Effective communication with business stakeholders and senior leadership
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Willingness to learn from and collaborate with diverse teams
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Strategic long-term thinking
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Ability to translate between data and business needs
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Management of stress and adherence to company policies
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Professionalism and trustworthiness
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Customer service orientation
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
function_responsibility
Provide executive leadership in digital marketing, data science, and measurement
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
function_responsibility
Create solutions for internal needs and client projects
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
function_responsibility
Design, implement, and execute measurement solutions to improve media, website, and marketing performance
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
function_responsibility
Lead statistical/database marketing and financial analysis efforts
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
function_responsibility
Conduct executive level conversations for recommendations and results evaluation
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
function_responsibility
Analyze complex, high dimensionality data for business insights
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
function_responsibility
Develop analytics capabilities for clients
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
function_responsibility
Manage and mentor a team of analysts
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
function_responsibility
Recommend KPIs and establish measurement processes for marketing initiatives
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
function_responsibility
Oversee report definition and generation
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
function_responsibility
Lead the deployment of analytic systems and reporting projects
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
domain_industry
Digital marketing and data science knowledge
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
domain_industry
Media measurement/modeling expertise
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
domain_industry
Database marketing principles
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
domain_industry
Statistical modeling proficiency
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
domain_industry
Understanding of agency and consulting services industry
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
domain_industry
Familiarity with financial statement analysis
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
domain_industry
Expertise in marketing performance analysis and dashboarding
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
domain_industry
Customer segmentation and ROI modeling
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
domain_industry
Cross channel and media mix analysis experience
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
quantitative_skill
Bachelor’s degree in a quantitative field
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
quantitative_skill
Experience in marketing/advertising analytics
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
quantitative_skill
Digital marketing analytics software proficiency (Adobe Analytics, GTM, Omniture, Google Analytics, ViQ, etc.)
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
quantitative_skill
Comprehension of media landscape, site analytics, attribution, and CRM systems
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
quantitative_skill
Analytical software platforms proficiency (SAS, SPSS, R, Alteryx, Python)
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
quantitative_skill
Database querying, reporting, and visualization tools expertise (Tableau, Alteryx, SQL)
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
quantitative_skill
Scrum/Agile methodologies experience
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
qualitative_skill
Proven leadership capabilities
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
qualitative_skill
Ability to provide actionable business insights
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
qualitative_skill
Passion for industry trends and best practices
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
qualitative_skill
Strong project management skills
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
qualitative_skill
Attention to detail
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
qualitative_skill
Time management skills
Vice President Marketing Analytics and Data Science
qualitative_skill
Curiosity, passion, and motivation
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Define marketing operations and performance measurement vision, roadmap, and strategy
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Learn systems, processes, and vendors for tech stacks in marketing
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Outline business objectives and success criteria for marketing activities
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Develop, map, and document key marketing workflows
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Ensure data quality, integrity, and security for marketing data
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Create and maintain streamlined reporting processes for marketing metrics
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Enable operations at scale and drive automation efforts in marketing
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Collaborate with Marketing, Product, Data, and Engineering teams
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Manage relationships with external service providers, agencies, and vendors
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Establish standardized data governance processes and practices
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Acquire, clean, and transform data for advanced analytics
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Lead marketing technology projects and initiatives
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Optimize marketing funnel and improve data workflows
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Utilize analytics to measure marketing campaign performance
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Construct and manage marketing reports, dashboards, and visualization tools
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Advise on marketing performance to ensure cross-functional alignment
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Optimize marketing activities based on performance data
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
function_responsibility
Optimize lead scoring and distribution methodology
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
domain_industry
Financial services industry knowledge
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
domain_industry
B2B marketing analytics and operations
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
domain_industry
Marketing systems and automation platforms expertise
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
domain_industry
Database structure and data hygiene understanding
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
domain_industry
Marketing data governance experience
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
domain_industry
GDPR regulations knowledge
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
quantitative_skill
SQL expertise
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
quantitative_skill
Data analytics tools proficiency (GA, Python, R)
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
quantitative_skill
Tech & data visualization tools proficiency (Tableau, Power BI, Salesforce)
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
quantitative_skill
Marketing automation platforms expertise (Marketo, Hubspot, Salesforce)
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
qualitative_skill
Solve complex business problems
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
qualitative_skill
Think from first principles
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
qualitative_skill
Build scalable processes
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
qualitative_skill
Use data and metrics to measure impact and determine improvements
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
qualitative_skill
Manage multiple projects in a fast-paced environment
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
qualitative_skill
Excellent communication skills
Manager, Marketing Analytics and Data Strategy
qualitative_skill
Desire to improve operations and processes
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Responsible for the GTM funnel, real-time analytics, and impact for revenue teams
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Identify and translate market opportunities into actionable recommendations
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Support Sales and Marketing in new customer acquisition and customer value maximization
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Cultivate and deliver projects and service levels on budget
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Develop and execute data-driven marketing strategies
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Analyze customer behavior, 3rd party data, and sales performance for insights
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Define and measure ROI targets for marketing initiatives
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Lead the development of advanced analytic models for marketing effectiveness
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Partner with data engineering and revenue operations for consistent data structures
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Refine reporting mechanisms and measure funnel impact
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Scale a measurement mindset for data-driven decision making
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Define and develop KPIs, targets, and insights for marketing investment optimization
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Automate data collection and reporting processes
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Train and mentor team members on analytical methodologies
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Provide analytical, strategic, and operational support to Senior Executives
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Own GTM BI & Analytics Roadmap
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
function_responsibility
Build and maintain data architecture for self-service analytics
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
domain_industry
Understanding of digital media, website, product, email, events, and sales engagement effectiveness
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
domain_industry
Market research and data analysis methods
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
domain_industry
Sales performance and revenue optimization
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
domain_industry
Revenue operations (RevOps)
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
domain_industry
Knowledge of AI and cloud-based platforms in revenue lifecycle management
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
quantitative_skill
Data analytics expertise
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
quantitative_skill
Experience building data models
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
quantitative_skill
Proficiency with data analysis tools and statistical methodologies
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
quantitative_skill
Experience in self-service analytics via Tableau
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
quantitative_skill
Ability to create tables, graphs, and written reports from complex data
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
qualitative_skill
Excellent communication skills, verbal and written
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
qualitative_skill
Superior critical thinking skills
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
qualitative_skill
High level of accuracy and attention to detail
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
qualitative_skill
Ability to convert complex data into understandable formats
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
qualitative_skill
Aptitude for automating data processes
Sr. Director/VP, Marketing Analytics & Strategy
qualitative_skill
Capability to mentor and train team members
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Define and execute marketing analytics strategy
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Oversee lead scoring model development and optimization
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop customer segmentation and personalization strategies
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Establish KPIs and dashboards for performance tracking
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Provide recommendations for budget allocation and forecasting
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Conduct market trends, competitive activity, and consumer behavior analysis
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Manage and grow marketing analytics team
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Improve data infrastructure, tools, and processes in collaboration with engineering and data teams
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Align data insights with strategic initiatives across departments
Director of Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing analytics
Director of Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Customer acquisition strategies
Director of Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Statistical modeling and attribution methodologies
Director of Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Data-driven decision making
Director of Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Knowledge-based business platforms
Director of Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing performance optimization
Director of Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
SQL proficiency
Director of Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Python proficiency
Director of Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Analytics tools proficiency
Director of Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Data management platforms proficiency
Director of Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Leadership and team development
Director of Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Effective communication of complex data insights
Director of Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Business acumen
Director of Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Analytical thinking
Director of Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Results-oriented approach
Director of Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strategic vision and alignment with business goals
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Lead and inspire a team responsible for driving data driven decisions across marketing and digital commerce efforts
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Oversee marketing analytics, measurement, and CRO
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Deliver actionable insights to improve efficiency, growth, and patient engagement
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Collaborate with media, merchandising and data teams to enhance campaign performance
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Optimize marketing investments and maximize conversion rates and revenue growth
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Lead the analytics and measurement function to inform decision making and marketing strategy
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Develop and maintain a robust measurement framework for campaign effectiveness
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Produce reports and data visualizations to drive business growth
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Align with the data team on tagging strategies and tools for KPI tracking
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Lead CRO strategies that improve digital engagement and conversions
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Implement data driven experimentation and testing to improve user experience
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Ensure a seamless, high converting experience for prospective patients
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Partner with media team and agencies to align performance goals
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Develop, coach, and mentor a team of analysts and CRO experts
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
function_responsibility
Implement and maintain measurement frameworks, tools, and technologies
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
domain_industry
Retail healthcare business support
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
domain_industry
Health and wellness office operations across various states
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
domain_industry
Consumer facing healthcare businesses management
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
domain_industry
Marketing analytics and performance measurement in healthcare
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
domain_industry
Conversion rate optimization in digital healthcare commerce
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
domain_industry
Compliance with healthcare industry regulations (e.g., HIPAA)
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
domain_industry
Marketing strategies in dental care, urgent care, medical aesthetics, and animal health
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
domain_industry
Digital marketing and eCommerce strategies in healthcare
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
quantitative_skill
Marketing analytics
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
quantitative_skill
Performance measurement techniques
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
quantitative_skill
A/B and multivariate testing methodologies
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
quantitative_skill
Data analytics tools proficiency (SQL, Python, R, Google Analytics)
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
quantitative_skill
Marketing measurement platform proficiency
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
qualitative_skill
Visionary leadership
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
qualitative_skill
Strategic insight development
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
qualitative_skill
Innovative solution development
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
qualitative_skill
Effective communication and collaboration
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
qualitative_skill
Influencing stakeholders across organizational levels
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
qualitative_skill
Exceptional leadership in team management and development
Senior Director of Marketing Analytics and Optimization
qualitative_skill
Compliance with patient privacy and data security standards
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead a group of analysts supporting web or mobile app product teams
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Collaborate with Senior Director and VP level marketing leaders on strategic initiatives
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Perform online reporting, collection, and analysis of complex digital qualitative and quantitative metrics
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Identify issues, developing trends, or areas for further investigation
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Proactively identify opportunities to drive tangible business results
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Present data in a clear and compelling way to influence strategy
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop measurement plans and technical requirement documents for dataset creation
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Manage workload within the analytics team
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Prepare for and lead various team and marketing alignment meetings
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead analytics self-service and enablement initiatives
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Report monthly KPIs and dashboards
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Build processes ensuring best practices in marketing performance
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Be the subject matter expert for analytic tools owned by the team
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Create strategies for maximizing tool benefits and effectiveness
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Identify opportunities for operational excellence within the team
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Digital marketing analytics
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Understanding of EDAI (Enterprise Data, Analytics, & Insights)
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Knowledge of Solution Design References (SDR)
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Experience in financial services industry
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Knowledge of financial products, customers, transaction and interaction data
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Awareness of regulatory compliance in financial services
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Analysis of digital data using Adobe Analytics
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Analysis of digital data using Adobe Customer Journey Analytics
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with big data environments (AWS, Azure)
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Data wrangling or analysis in big data environments
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Coding in Pyspark
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Coding in Python
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Coding in SQL
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Creating and reporting KPIs and dashboards
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Statistical analyses methodologies
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with Customer Data Platforms (CDP)
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Leading and coaching employees
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Sharing compelling insights using MS PowerPoint to C-suite audiences
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong relationship and communication skills
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to influence customers on recommendations
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Leading enablement and self-service analytics initiatives
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to work collaboratively and independently
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Proven track record of driving analytics into actionable business outcomes
Director - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead a team of marketing analysts
Director - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Foster a collaborative team culture
Director - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Present the marketing analytics roadmap to senior leadership
Director - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Interpret complex data sets to shape marketing strategy
Director - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Deliver campaign findings for marketing program optimization
Director - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Collaborate for a full funnel analytics view and reporting
Director - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Leverage predictive modeling for personalized marketing strategies
Director - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Understand and apply measurement techniques for marketing analysis
Director - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Maintain compliance with state and federal regulations
Director - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Perform other managerial duties as needed
Director - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Data driven marketing strategies
Director - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing ROI optimization
Director - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Credit union compliance knowledge
Director - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Bank secrecy and anti-money laundering laws
Director - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Full funnel analytics from acquisition to loyalty
Director - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Multivariate testing knowledge
Director - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Brand and advertisement tracking
Director - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing return on investment (MORI) understanding
Director - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Cross-channel marketing optimization
Director - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Adobe Analytics
Director - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Google Analytics
Director - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Data Cloud
Director - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Tableau
Director - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Power BI
Director - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
SQL
Director - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
SAS
Director - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
SPSS
Director - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
S Plus
Director - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
R or other data analytics tools
Director - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Leadership and team management
Director - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Excellent written/verbal communication skills
Director - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to adapt to growth and pivot to meet goals
Director - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strategic and tactical thinking
Director - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Analytic reasoning
Director - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Creative problem solving
Director - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Collaborative team player attitude
Director - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to navigate and influence the organization
Director - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to build relationships and partner with internal/external groups
Director - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong interpersonal skills
Director - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Passion for emerging research tools and technologies
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
function_responsibility
Utilize data science methodologies to analyze and extract insights from customer data within the CDP
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
function_responsibility
Develop predictive models, propensity scores, and customer lifetime value models
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
function_responsibility
Implement machine learning algorithms for personalized customer experiences
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
function_responsibility
Collaborate with data engineers and data architects for data integration
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
function_responsibility
Translate business objectives into data science solutions
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
function_responsibility
Create visualizations and dashboards for stakeholder communication
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
function_responsibility
Monitor and evaluate model performance and make necessary improvements
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
function_responsibility
Stay updated on industry trends in data science and customer analytics
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
function_responsibility
Collaborate with cross-functional teams including data engineering and product development
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
function_responsibility
Align data science initiatives with business objectives through liaison with IT and business stakeholders
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
domain_industry
Customer analytics and journey mapping
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
domain_industry
Customer Data Platform (CDP) experience
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
domain_industry
Knowledge of Tealium as a CDP
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
domain_industry
Understanding of machine learning algorithms and statistical modeling techniques
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
domain_industry
Marketing performance reporting understanding
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
domain_industry
Familiarity with industrial software industry trends and practices
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
quantitative_skill
Programming in Python or R for data analysis and machine learning
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
quantitative_skill
Experience with advanced analytics solutions
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
quantitative_skill
Ability to create visualizations and dashboards
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
quantitative_skill
Machine learning algorithm implementation
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
quantitative_skill
Statistical modeling proficiency
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
quantitative_skill
Data science solution delivery
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
qualitative_skill
Excellent communication and presentation skills
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
qualitative_skill
Ability to translate technical concepts to non-technical stakeholders
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
qualitative_skill
Collaborative work in a cross-functional environment
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
qualitative_skill
Proven track record of business impact through data science solutions
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
qualitative_skill
Flexibility with hybrid working arrangements
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
qualitative_skill
Inclusive culture and diversity value
Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics and Reporting
qualitative_skill
Ability to work with stakeholders across marketing, product, and sales operations
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Manage business relationship and create trusted partnerships
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Participate in business strategy discussions
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Provide guidance and recommendations on strategy
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Communicate analytics and data plans with storytelling ability
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Define and size business opportunities/problems for analytics/data solutions
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Assess and prioritize analytics/data solution opportunities
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Design analytical and data solutions using various techniques
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Develop analytics and data roadmaps to support business strategy
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Lead cross-functional execution of analytics and data solutions
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Provide functional thought leadership on projects with risk and complexity
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Analyze and anticipate internal and external business challenges
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Recommend process, product, or service improvements
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Shape integration of own and related disciplines with broader function
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Provide data-driven insights for multiple business areas
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Establish and achieve business area objectives and key results
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Oversee core metrics and key performance indicators for specific business areas
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Solve unique and multifaceted problems with broad business impact
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Partner with data analysts and scientists to solve problems
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Guide less experienced colleagues and potentially prioritize work
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Lead projects with significant risk and resource requirements
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Collect, manipulate, and analyze datasets for multiple business areas
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Define reporting data sets, core metrics, and KPIs for new business areas
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Utilize BI/Reporting tools for data exploration and output production
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Lead problem-solving efforts with high-risk potential
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Communicate complex ideas and persuade others
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Contribute to change initiatives and solicit feedback for improvement
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Prepare and present professional presentations, reports, or visualizations
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Adapt to new situations such as teams, projects, or work processes
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Keep up to date on industry, competitor, and market trends
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Champion relevant data to users and monitor data sources for feedback
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
function_responsibility
Maintain and enhance data usefulness, integrity, and security across the enterprise
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
domain_industry
Strategic business acumen and analysis skills
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
domain_industry
Understanding of products/services and market competition
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
domain_industry
Knowledge of business concepts, metrics, processes, and systems
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
domain_industry
Expert knowledge of leading practices and integration of own area with others
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
domain_industry
In-depth knowledge of key data across multiple data domains or business units
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
domain_industry
Familiarity with source systems and the data they generate
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
domain_industry
In-depth knowledge of multiple data models and data storage tools
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
domain_industry
Awareness of aesthetic principles in report/scorecard development
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
quantitative_skill
Data mining technologies (Alteryx, R, Python)
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
quantitative_skill
Interpret data models and exploratory analysis of databases
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
quantitative_skill
Translate complex business requirements into logical data models
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
quantitative_skill
Provide datasets for exploratory analysis
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
quantitative_skill
Construct dynamic and static reports/scorecards
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
quantitative_skill
Visualize multivariate data within comprehensive visuals
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
quantitative_skill
BI applications proficiency (PowerBI)
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
quantitative_skill
Advanced reporting and data visualization skills
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
qualitative_skill
Ability to communicate analytics in layperson’s terms
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
qualitative_skill
Communicate at every level of detail in the organization
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
qualitative_skill
Lead development of presentation logic
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
qualitative_skill
Strong presentation skills
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
qualitative_skill
Ability to communicate effectively both verbally and in writing
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
qualitative_skill
Independent management of multiple strategic priorities
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
qualitative_skill
Adaptability to new teams, projects, or work processes
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
qualitative_skill
Persuasive communication and influencing skills
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
qualitative_skill
Tutoring coworkers on various data domains
Lead Analyst - Marketing Analytics (Remote)
qualitative_skill
Validating data structures and alignment with business definitions
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Business partner to VP of Americas on Marketing Analytics
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Drive performance insights for the Americas Marketing Organization
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Deliver insightful readouts to the Americas leadership team
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead and mentor a team of analysts
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Build and execute a multi-quarter analysis and measurement innovation roadmap
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Drive business requirements for technical projects
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
B2B marketing strategy and measurement
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Data-driven storytelling
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Expertise in SQL
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Advanced Excel proficiency
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to translate marketing asks into technical requirements
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Stakeholder engagement
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Coaching and career development for analysts
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Represent analysis and measurement strategy in executive level conversations
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Deliver commercial impact by strategically applying data insights across customer and marketing channel performance
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Optimize marketing mix
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Manage and scale a marketing data foundation across all channels and program types
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Recruit and develop high performing talent in a regionally dispersed team
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Create psychological safety and build inclusive cultures
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Synthesize data and insights into narratives and presentations
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Analyze A/B and Multivariate tests to inform marketing strategies
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Define and measure ROI targets
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop advanced analytic models to drive marketing effectiveness
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Define data models and structure across systems for consistency
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Drive decision making through data and refine reporting mechanisms
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Automate data collection and reporting processes
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Train and mentor team members on analytical methodologies
Director, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Communicate strategic findings to executive leadership
Director, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Experience Management software industry
Director, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Knowledge of marketing analytics and customer LTV
Director, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Understanding of marketing and digital strategies
Director, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Familiarity with market research and data analysis methods
Director, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Experience with media mix modeling, marketing measurement and attribution
Director, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Knowledge of online purchase funnel optimization and user segmentation
Director, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Mathematical and statistical techniques application
Director, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Data analysis tools and statistical methodologies
Director, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Digital analytics and visualization tools proficiency (Google Analytics, Google BigQuery, Tableau)
Director, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Statistical modeling, regression analysis, and predictive modeling techniques
Director, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Agile development methods
Director, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
ETL, SQL, R, and SPSS proficiency
Director, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with cohort analyses, time series analyses, regression models
Director, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Detail-oriented and passion for problem solving
Director, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Thrive in a collaborative and dynamic environment
Director, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to establish successful partnerships across business and data stakeholders
Director, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Self-motivated with excellent communication skills
Director, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Project management and organizational abilities
Director, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Critical thinking with high level of accuracy and attention to detail
Director, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to convert complex data into understandable reports
Director, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Leadership within a diverse and inclusive community
Director, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Big picture thinking and fostering innovation and creativity
Director, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strategic and tactical skills application in a fast-paced environment
Vice President Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead the design and implementation of marketing data foundation
Vice President Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Oversee marketing analytics projects including propensity modeling and churn prediction
Vice President Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Build and lead a high performing analytics team
Vice President Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Collaborate with IT and other business units on marketing data initiatives
Vice President Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Recommend data visualization tools to maximize business value
Vice President Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Conduct hands-on technical work such as predictive modeling and reporting automation
Vice President Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Understanding of higher education market dynamics
Vice President Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Knowledge of private equity investment and exit strategies
Vice President Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Experience with funnel management and lead to enrollment models
Vice President Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Familiarity with AI tools for inbound marketing and customer engagement
Vice President Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Expertise in advanced marketing analytics
Vice President Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Machine learning and predictive modeling using Python (Scikit-Learn)
Vice President Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Proficiency in SQL and large-scale databases (e.g., BigQuery, Snowflake, Redshift)
Vice President Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Proficient in data visualization tools (Power BI, Tableau, Looker)
Vice President Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Data science techniques for marketing insights extraction
Vice President Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
ETL process management
Vice President Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strategic leadership aligning marketing initiatives with business goals
Vice President Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Team management fostering a collaborative and results-oriented environment
Vice President Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Cross-functional leadership and collaboration skills
Vice President Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to present complex insights in clear, actionable formats
Vice President Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Visionary leadership capable of driving marketing strategy transformation
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Lead the Retail Media Analytics team
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Develop retail media analytics portfolio
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Set strategic direction for retail media analytics
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Deliver insights to drive marketing performance
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Provide strategic recommendations to optimize client relationships and business growth
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Lead analytical teams across marketing channels and/or retail
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Present complex findings concisely
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Ensure data accuracy and integrity
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Own client contractually obligated reporting
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Collaborate with cross-functional teams to automate reporting
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Troubleshoot data issues
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Develop additional reporting as per client needs
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Consolidate and analyze data for client insights
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Provide actionable recommendations for marketing optimization
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Educate business users on using data and reports for marketing performance
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Manage the analytics client relationship
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Foster strong working relationships with key clients
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
function_responsibility
Improve data accuracy and reporting capabilities
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
domain_industry
Pet industry health and wellness knowledge
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
domain_industry
Retail media client management
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
domain_industry
Understanding of vendor marketing goals and challenges
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
domain_industry
Web and app analytics tools
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
domain_industry
Advertising effectiveness analysis
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
domain_industry
Marketing mix modeling
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
domain_industry
Multi-touch attribution
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
domain_industry
ROI measurement
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
domain_industry
A/B testing principles
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
quantitative_skill
Data analysis
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
quantitative_skill
Data visualization using Looker
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
quantitative_skill
Data visualization using Tableau
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
quantitative_skill
SQL experience
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
quantitative_skill
Web and app analytics with Adobe Analytics
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
quantitative_skill
Web and app analytics with Google Analytics
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
quantitative_skill
Programming with Python/R
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
qualitative_skill
Leadership in data-driven environments
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
qualitative_skill
Excellent communication skills
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
qualitative_skill
Strong problem-solving abilities
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
qualitative_skill
Ability to work independently and collaboratively
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
qualitative_skill
Motivated and analytical leadership
Director, Marketing Analytics - Retail Media Network
qualitative_skill
Building relationships through data-driven insights
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Engage audiences across various e-commerce channels
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Interpret and present data for strategic decisions
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Manage direct reports
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Design and manage attribution models
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead teams and communicate up to C-suite
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Work cross-functionally as an analytical SME
Director of Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop processes around data for regulatory compliance
Director of Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing analytics in e-commerce
Director of Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Understanding of statistic and predictive analytics
Director of Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Knowledge of conversion paths and customer journeys in e-commerce
Director of Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Experience with budget and channel optimization
Director of Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Analytics across multiple e-commerce channels
Director of Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
SQL proficiency
Director of Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Power BI proficiency
Director of Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Python proficiency
Director of Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong analytical skills
Director of Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Team leadership
Director of Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Effective communication skills
Director of Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to make data-driven decisions
Director of Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Cross-functional collaboration
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead strategic development and execution of brand measurement and analytics initiatives
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Collaborate with business leadership, marketing, sales, and product teams
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Deliver actionable insights to optimize brand strategy and drive growth
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop a robust analytics framework for brand health and marketing ROI
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Analyze data to inform brand strategies
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Design and implement brand marketing metrics and reporting systems
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Partner with cross-functional teams to align data strategies with business goals
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Use advanced analytics for media investments and optimization
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Mentor and develop a high-performing analytics team
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Communicate findings to senior leadership and stakeholders
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Implement latest analytics tools and technologies
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Recruit and sustain a high-performing team
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Promote a culture of continuous improvement and exceptional employee engagement
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Maintain Thrivent's trust and reputation with clients
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Work closely with peer group of Directors
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead a team of individual contributors
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Brand measurement analytics
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing ROI analysis
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Consumer behavior analysis
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Market trends analysis
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Competitive performance analysis
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Predictive modeling
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
A/B testing
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Attribution analysis
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Brand marketing analytics in consumer goods, retail, tech industries
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing analytics
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Attribution solutions
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Expertise in analytics platforms (e.g., Google Analytics, Adobe Analytics)
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Proficiency in data visualization tools (e.g., Tableau, Power BI)
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Statistical analysis
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Familiarity with SQL, Python, or R
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong analytical background
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Proven leadership skills
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Experience in delivering data-driven recommendations
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to translate complex data into clear, actionable insights
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong presentation skills
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Executive presence
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Large group presentation skills
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to lead and inspire teams
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Drive collaboration
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Deliver measurable business impact
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Fostering a culture of curiosity, innovation, and data-driven excellence
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Holding self and others accountable
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Supporting continuous improvement and exceptional employee engagement
Director, Brand Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Demonstrating resiliency and making the best decisions
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Maintain and Modernize Marketing Mix Modeling Program
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Lead the development and implementation of advanced marketing mix models
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Act as the ambassador of data driven marketing
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Create a roadmap of marketing mix capability evolution
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Manage the team and cross functional partners to achieve roadmap milestones
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Link Marketing Mix program with other analytic capabilities
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Manage a team of onshore and offshore data scientists
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Provide ongoing consulting on Promotional Resource Allocation
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Craft compelling narratives for complex data insights
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Present findings and recommendations to senior leadership
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Collaborate with cross functional teams to integrate marketing mix models into strategic planning
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Manage capabilities utilizing machine learning and statistical techniques for customer segmentation
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Develop and manage personalized Paid Owned Earned Media targeting capability
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Create and implement a roadmap of new analytics capabilities
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Serve as strategic advisor on key organization wide initiatives
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Design, manage and lead a high performing team
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Facilitate cross functional collaboration to integrate marketing strategies with business goals
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Work with data engineering teams to ensure data quality and integrity
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Design and Evolve User Experience for the Marketing Mix Program
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
function_responsibility
Maintain resourcing and budget for the program
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Marketing mix modeling
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Customer data science
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Marketing and sales analytics ecosystem
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Engagement Analytics
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Creative Testing
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Audience Analytics
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Forecasting
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Patient Funnel Analytics
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Promotional Resource Allocation
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Marketing analytics innovation
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Data governance and compliance
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Pharma industry knowledge
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Direct-to-Consumer (DTC) marketing
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Healthcare Professional (HCP) marketing
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Content and creative analytics
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
domain_industry
Analytic ecosystem principles
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
quantitative_skill
Statistical software proficiency
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
quantitative_skill
R programming
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
quantitative_skill
Python programming
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
quantitative_skill
SQL proficiency
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
quantitative_skill
Machine learning techniques
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
quantitative_skill
Statistical analysis
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
quantitative_skill
Dataiku experience
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
qualitative_skill
Storytelling and executive influence
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
qualitative_skill
Leadership and communication skills
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
qualitative_skill
Ability to influence and drive change
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
qualitative_skill
Experience in highly matrixed environments
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
qualitative_skill
Analytics program and product creation
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
qualitative_skill
Analytics product lifecycle acumen
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
qualitative_skill
Building analytics capabilities
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
qualitative_skill
Embedding analytics into workflows
Marketing Analytics and Portfolio Optimization Lead
qualitative_skill
Full stack development team management
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Build out marketing analytics for the Spotter Studio business
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop and implement customer segmentation using advanced analytics techniques
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Collaborate with marketing and product growth teams to establish measurement tools and document performance data
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Influence and establish strategies based on data insights
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop and maintain dashboards and reporting tools for marketing performance
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Monitor key metrics and investigate anomalies
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Partner with product, marketing, and engineering teams during new feature releases
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Support product learning goals and deploy multivariate tests
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Synthesize analytical results into practical recommendations
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Guide stakeholders in usage of reporting and analytics
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing analytics for SaaS/subscription-based products
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Churn and retention analysis
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Digital marketing attribution
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Knowledge of YouTube and/or the Creator Economy
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Advanced analytics techniques including clustering, predictive modeling, and classification and regression trees
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Proficiency using SQL and/or Python/R for ad hoc analysis
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with marketing analytics tools (Google Analytics, Heap, Amplitude, Adobe Analytics)
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Proficiency in PowerPoint and/or Google Slides
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with data visualization tools (Power BI, TIBCO Spotfire, Looker, Tableau)
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Designing, conducting, and analyzing A/B multivariate tests
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Excellent communication and storytelling skills for technical and non-technical audiences
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to troubleshoot data-related issues
Senior Data Analyst - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Advocating for the use of analytics in product decision-making
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead marketing analytics efforts
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Drive data-driven decision making across the marketing organization
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop and implement a comprehensive marketing analytics strategy
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Build and manage a high-performing team of marketing analysts
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Deliver actionable insights to optimize marketing efforts
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Support marketing goals with appropriate analysis
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Provide coaching and mentorship to marketing analysts
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Foster a culture of testing and continuous learning and development
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Focus on key performance indicators (KPIs) and return on investment (ROI) measurement
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Design and execute marketing analytics frameworks and processes
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Translate complex data into actionable insights and compelling narratives
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Collaborate with cross-functional teams to enhance data models and tools
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Implement new methodologies to improve data collection and reporting
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Champion data-driven decision making and foster a data-driven marketing culture
Director Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing analytics methodologies
Director Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing attribution modeling
Director Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing mix modeling
Director Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Subscription/SaaS analytics
Director Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing analytics trends, tools, and best practices
Director Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing channels and sources analysis
Director Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Proficiency in SQL
Director Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Marketing analytics and visualization tool expertise
Director Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with Google Analytics
Director Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with Heap Analytics
Director Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with Tableau
Director Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with Mar Tech platforms
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Excellent communication skills
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong presentation and storytelling ability
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Analytical and problem-solving mindset
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Collaborative and results-oriented approach
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong work ethic
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to manage multiple priorities effectively
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop marketing audiences
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Set up test designs and strategies for marketing programs
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Create consumer and member audiences using targeting models and segmentation
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Connect audiences to targeted media across multiple digital channels
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Track consumer and member touchpoints from advertising to call center interactions
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Construct datasets for reporting and dashboards
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Monitor marketing program progress across touchpoints
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Launch and report on A/B and multivariate tests
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Mine data for insights to improve consumer and member journeys
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Engage with stakeholders to develop go-to-market plans and support strategies
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead planning for member growth and retention
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Manage multiple work streams and projects
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Utilize data storytelling for presentations and content
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Build relationships with business, marketing, and tech partners
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Serve as an advisor and advocate for analytics-driven solutions
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Direct to consumer healthcare marketing
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Digital media measurement and optimization
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Familiarity with Adobe Analytics/Customer Journey Analytics
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Experience with Liveramp
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Knowledge of advanced analytics tools and methodologies
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Proficiency in mathematical analysis methods
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Experience in machine learning and statistical analyses
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Predictive modeling specialization
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
10+ years of relevant analytic experience
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
5+ years of experience using R or Python
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
5+ years of advanced SQL experience
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
3+ years of experience with Tableau or React for dashboards
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Data Science technical practitioner skills
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Excellent time management and planning
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong data storytelling techniques
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to communicate technical concepts to business partners
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Effective influencer and stakeholder management
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Trusted partner in analytics solutions
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Adept at building models and consumer segmentation
Principal Data Scientist - Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Bachelor's or Master's degree in relevant field (or equivalent experience)
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Guide financial and performance deconstruction and insight development for marketing team
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Analyze marketing performance metrics
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Provide actionable insights to optimize traffic, revenue, and spend
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Work closely with channel leaders to identify optimization opportunities
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Report marketing performance to leadership teams
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Collaborate with stakeholders across various departments
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Build structured diagnostic tools and templates
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Use advanced analytics to identify trends and assess marketing test results
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Work with data engineering and analytics teams to ensure data availability
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Digital marketing expertise
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Finance analytics in digital marketing context
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Knowledge of SEO, SEM, Paid Social, CRM channels
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing analytics methodologies
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Understanding of attribution and mix media models
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Familiarity with funnel analysis
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Exposure to web/app clickstream data
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
SQL proficiency
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Tableau expertise
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with Snowflake, Python, R
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Marketing analytics tool usage
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Analyzing large datasets from Tableau, clickstream, Google, email
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong oral and written communication skills
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Analytics thought leadership
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Consulting mindset
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to work with senior leaders
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Aptitude for high impact, complex data projects
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Influencing skills
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Team management and collaboration
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Manage analytics and reporting
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Organize and move marketing data across data ecosystem
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop and analyze performance metrics for targeted campaigns
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Report on various marketing projects
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Advise on process improvement for data collection and analytics
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead a team translating data into business strategy insights
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Manage team members in development of reporting and analytics
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop quarterly and annual business goals for the analytics team
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Direct data modeling architecture for reporting environments
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead cross functional data and tool infrastructure strategy discussions
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop processes to ensure accuracy of reporting
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Educate teams on marketing reporting and data sources
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Present analytical results to non-technical team members and executives
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Deliver regular reporting to marketing team and executives
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead marketing analytics priority development for multiple marketing teams
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Implement strategic policies for selecting analytical methods and criteria
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Establish budgets, schedules, work plans, and performance requirements
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
HR and payroll software solutions
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Modern workforce management
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
HCM software
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
B2B SaaS environment
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Go to market function
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Digital media and marketing campaigns
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
SQL, R, or Python for data analysis
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Business Intelligence tools (Tableau, Power BI, Looker, etc.)
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Data warehouse concepts and ETL/ELT knowledge
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Digital analytics (Google Analytics)
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
CRM tools (Salesforce.com)
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Cloud Platforms usage
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Code review and testing best practices
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong collaborator
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Cross functional teamwork
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Adaptability and ability to pivot quickly
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Project management and priority setting
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Effective communication and presentation skills
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
In-depth knowledge of organizational objectives
Senior Manager Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strategic decision making based on data analysis
Lead, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Drive data-driven marketing strategy
Lead, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Optimize campaign performance
Lead, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Support data science in building predictive models and algorithms
Lead, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Design and implement real-time reporting and dashboards
Lead, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Collaborate with cross-functional teams
Lead, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Conduct in-depth cohort and channel analysis
Lead, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Enhance data infrastructure, tools, and visualization
Lead, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop and present executive-level reports
Lead, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Mentor junior analysts
Lead, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Stay abreast of latest trends in marketing analytics
Lead, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing analytics
Lead, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Multi-channel attribution
Lead, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Customer segmentation
Lead, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Predictive modeling
Lead, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Cohort analysis
Lead, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Resale as a service
Lead, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Managed marketplace for apparel, shoes, and accessories
Lead, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Sustainable fashion industry practices
Lead, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
SQL proficiency
Lead, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Python proficiency
Lead, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
R proficiency
Lead, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with BI platforms (Looker, Tableau, Google Data Studio)
Lead, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with performance reporting and goal tracking
Lead, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strategic vision
Lead, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Collaborative leadership
Lead, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong communication skills
Lead, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to influence stakeholders
Lead, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Innovative mindset
Lead, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Data storytelling
Lead, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Adaptability
Lead, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Entrepreneurial spirit
Lead, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Growth focus
Lead, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Diversity, inclusion, and belonging advocacy
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Design, build and maintain data infrastructure
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Create automated reporting and dashboards
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Design and measure experiments
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Execute complex analysis to support business functions
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop scaled, automated, user-friendly systems, reports, APIs, and dashboards
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Implement KPIs, automated reporting/process solutions, and data infrastructure improvements
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Extract insight and learning from large and complicated data sets
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Prototype new marketing solutions and perform ad hoc investigations
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Own the design, development, and maintenance of datasets, ongoing metrics, analyses, and dashboards
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop queries and visualizations for ad hoc requests and projects
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Continually improve reporting and analysis processes
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Identify performance gaps and opportunities for optimization
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Build data infrastructure in collaboration with tech teams
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Support central BI team in reporting on global marketing efforts
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Promote best practices in ETL
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Provide guidance in technical documentation
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Enterprise level analytics for SMB Marketing
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Digital advertising solutions
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing content delivery to advertisers
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Business intelligence in e-commerce advertising
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Knowledge management in data/BI space
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
5+ years of SQL experience
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Programming to extract, transform, and clean large data sets
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Scripting for automation (e.g., Python)
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Advanced SQL skills
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Statistical analytics
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Programming languages such as R, Python, Ruby
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to develop and maintain collaborative relationships with operations/business/science/tech teams
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Consulting to develop and implement data solutions
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Analytical and statistical rigor
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Problem solving
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Communication of insights and recommendations
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Incorporate operational excellence best practices
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Data integrity, design, analysis, validation, and documentation in reporting
Sr. Business Intelligence Engineer, SMB Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Experience managing, analyzing and communicating results to senior leadership
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Serve as the primary expert for MarTech stack
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Design and maintain advanced marketing dashboards
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Leverage Adobe Customer Journey Analytics for deep analysis of customer journeys
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Design and implement multi-touch attribution models
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Create interactive data visualizations for marketing insights communication
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Establish and maintain API connections between MarTech tools and data platforms
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
Expertise in Adobe Analytics, Adobe Target, Adobe Customer Journey Analytics
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
Experience with Salesforce Marketing Cloud
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
Understanding of B2B or SaaS marketing
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
Knowledge of various attribution methodologies
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
Proficient in data visualization tools (Tableau, Metabase, Quicksite, Power BI, Looker)
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
Strong SQL skills for data manipulation and analysis
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
Experience with large datasets in a marketing context
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
Experience in API integration for MarTech solutions
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Highly technical and analytically skilled
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Exceptional data visualization skills
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Excellent analytical abilities
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Outstanding business acumen
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Keen eye for design
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Ability to translate complex data into actionable insights
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Serve as the primary expert for MarTech stack
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Design, implement, and maintain advanced marketing dashboards
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Leverage Adobe Customer Journey Analytics for deep analysis of customer journeys
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Design and implement multi touch attribution models
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Create sophisticated, interactive data visualizations
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Establish and maintain API connections between MarTech tools and data visualization platforms
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
MarTech expertise
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
Adobe and Salesforce ecosystems
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
Understanding of B2B and SaaS market segments
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
Familiarity with marketing channels and campaigns
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
Experience with attribution methodologies
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
Data visualization with Tableau, Metabase, Quicksite, Power BI, or Looker
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
Working with large datasets and complex data structures
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
Strong SQL skills for data manipulation and analysis
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
API integration for MarTech solutions
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Analytical skills
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Exceptional data visualization skills
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Excellent business acumen
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Keen eye for design
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Ability to translate complex data into actionable insights
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Outstanding communication skills
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Lead and manage multiple teams of marketing measurement experts
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Support individual team leader career growth and success
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Develop and execute Measurement Solutions team strategy
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Collaborate with internal teams to address roadblocks and innovate solutions
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Expand Measurement skills, knowledge, and product offerings
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Guide client engagements and improve service delivery
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Support business development and refine scopes of work for prospective clients
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Address complex analytics requests and guide teams to structure solutions
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Drive consulting & advisory skills to support project expansions
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Connect marketing measurement technology with client business impact
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Interpret client data and trends to advise business decisions
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Participate in Ovative's leadership forums and strategic initiatives
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Lead internal initiatives and contribute to Ovative's strategy development
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Marketing measurement and analytics
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Experience in digital marketing
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Knowledge of MMM (Media Mix Modeling) and MTA (Multi-Touch Attribution) models
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Familiarity with media test design and experimentation
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Proficiency in summarizing large data sets into actionable reports
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Understanding of web analytics data and digital marketing analytics software
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Managing large data sets
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Creating standard and ad hoc reporting
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Leveraging proprietary technology such as EMRge
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Utilizing third-party tools for marketing measurement
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Experience with Adobe Analytics, Google Analytics, or similar platforms
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Excellent communication skills
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Effective collaboration with stakeholders and partners
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Ability to partner with executive leaders
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Thriving in ambiguous situations
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Action-oriented and decisive
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Ability to translate complex data into tangible actions
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Demonstrated leadership and team development abilities
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Lead and develop marketing measurement teams
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Manage individual team leaders and support career growth
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Drive Measurement Solutions team strategy and execution
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Collaborate across internal teams to solve problems and achieve goals
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Advance Measurement skills, knowledge, toolset, product offerings, and culture
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Engage with clients for service improvement and strategy alteration
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Provide senior leadership during key client interactions
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Support business development and refine scopes of work
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Structure analytics requests and lead problem-solving initiatives
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Facilitate project-based expansions with clients
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Contribute subject matter expertise in marketing measurement technology
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Connect client data with business trends and narratives
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Link measurement work to client business models, goals, and challenges
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Participate in leadership forums and strategic initiatives at Ovative
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Lead internal strategic initiatives using structured problem-solving
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Support strategy development and strategic planning
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Marketing measurement program understanding
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Enterprise Marketing Return (EMR) methodology
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Digital marketing industry experience
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Media and marketing program transformation knowledge
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM) and Multi-Touch Attribution (MTA) models
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Media test design and analysis
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Data management and reporting
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Implementation of MMM and MTA solutions
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Testing and experimentation in marketing
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Analysis leading to insights and action
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Usage of proprietary and third-party measurement tools
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Web analytics software proficiency (Adobe Analytics, Google Analytics, ViQ, etc.)
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Team leadership and empowerment
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Career development for team members
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Strategic thinking and vision for team direction
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Problem-solving and innovation
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Client relationship management
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Executive communication and partnership
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Business development support skills
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Consulting and advisory skills
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Ability to work in a fast-paced environment
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Structured thinking and problem solving
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Action orientation and decision-making ability
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Thriving in ambiguous situations
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Connecting complex data to tangible actions
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Leverage advanced marketing technologies to drive decision making
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Create impactful marketing dashboards and sophisticated data visualizations
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Build and maintain robust reporting dashboards and systems
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Enable deep analysis of customer journeys across multiple touchpoints and channels
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Design and implement multi touch attribution models
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
function_responsibility
Establish and maintain API connections between MarTech tools and data platforms
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
MarTech stack expertise
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
Adobe and Salesforce ecosystems knowledge
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
Experience with B2B or SaaS
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
domain_industry
Understanding of various attribution methodologies
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
Data visualization with Tableau, Metabase, Quicksite, Power BI, Looker
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
Large dataset manipulation and complex data structure handling
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
Strong SQL skills for data analysis
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
Experience in API integrations for MarTech solutions
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
quantitative_skill
Adobe Analytics, Adobe Target, Adobe Customer Journey Analytics setup/onboarding
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Highly technical with analytical skills
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Exceptional data visualization skills
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Excellent analytical abilities
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Outstanding business acumen
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Keen eye for design
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
qualitative_skill
Ability to translate complex data into actionable insights
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Lead and manage teams of marketing measurement experts
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Develop individual career growth plans for team leaders
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Drive Measurement Solutions team strategy and execution
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Collaborate across internal teams to overcome obstacles and develop solutions
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Enhance Measurement skills, knowledge, tools, and product offerings
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Engage with clients to review and improve services
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Support business development through strategy/messaging and scoping
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Address complex analytics requests in a structured manner
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Identify key factors to advance client business
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Translate marketing measurement insights to business models and goals
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Participate in leadership forums and strategic initiatives within Ovative
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Lead internal strategic initiatives and contribute to company growth
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
function_responsibility
Support company strategy development and strategic planning
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Marketing measurement technology expertise
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Understanding of MMM (Marketing Mix Modeling) and MTA (Multi-Touch Attribution)
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Designing and interpreting media tests and experiments
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
domain_industry
Knowledge of digital marketing and web analytics
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Management of large data sets
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Creation of useful reporting views
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Proficiency with digital marketing analytics software (e.g., Adobe Analytics, Google Analytics, ViQ)
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
quantitative_skill
Analytical problem solving
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Excellent communication skills
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Ability to collaborate with multiple stakeholders
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Experience interacting with executive leadership
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Ability to work in ambiguous situations
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Action-oriented and decisive
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Ability to connect complex marketing data to actionable initiatives
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Trust and transparency fostering
Director, Marketing Analytics & Measurement
qualitative_skill
Strong performance in a team environment
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Lead analytics and insights efforts for Amazon Music Engagement Marketing
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Develop analytics roadmap and direction for marketing projects
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Collaborate with marketing stakeholders to deliver self-service solutions and insights
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Produce learning white papers and models to advance analytics and science offerings
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Work with a team of business intelligence engineers, data engineers, and scientists
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Prioritize across multiple stakeholders and projects
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Define and deliver reporting and visualization for internal business leaders
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Inform marketing investment decisions using analytical insights
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Educate and evangelize on analytics, insights, and measurement through documentation and sessions
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Build data pipelines, analytics, insights, and predictive models for customer acquisition, engagement, and retention
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Adhere to company policies and ensure exceptional customer service
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
function_responsibility
Follow all federal, state, and local laws
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Streaming music industry knowledge
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Subscription business model understanding
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Amazon Prime, devices, media, and entertainment business familiarity
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Experience with design of experiments and statistical analysis
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Knowledge of information retrieval, data science, machine learning, and data mining
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
domain_industry
Understanding of personalized marketing strategies
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
quantitative_skill
5+ years of SQL experience
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
quantitative_skill
Programming for data extraction, transformation, and cleaning of multi-TB datasets
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
quantitative_skill
Experience with AWS technologies
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
quantitative_skill
Scripting for automation using Python and advanced SQL skills
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Ability to translate between data and business needs
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Experience communicating results to senior leadership
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Ability to work safely and cooperatively with others
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Maintaining standards of excellence under stressful conditions
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Effective communication and respectful interaction with employees and supervisors
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Exercise sound judgment and effectively manage stress
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Demonstrate trustworthiness and professionalism
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Safeguard business operations and company reputation
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Willingness to contribute to analytics solutions in a dynamic environment
Marketing Analytics Lead, Amazon Music DISCO
qualitative_skill
Capability to prioritize effectively in a fast-paced environment
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Define and advance cost & coverage marketing strategy for brand
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead development of access and affordability messaging and promotional materials
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Analyze claims data to identify patterns, trends, and correlations
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Partner with US Market Access, Sales Leadership, Brand and Payer Solutions to identify access pull through opportunities
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Leverage insights generated by cross-functional partners to advance market leadership
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Identify opportunities for market research to drive competitive performance
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop patient messaging and resources for access and affordability support
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Ensure all materials and tools are approved and implemented through the MLR process
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Anticipate implications of changing market access dynamics
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Medical products or services marketing expertise
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Healthcare industry compliance and regulations knowledge
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Understanding of payer marketing
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Life Sciences industry experience
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Expertise working with large data sets
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Experience with marketing or product management
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Critical analysis of market conditions
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Project management skills
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong presentation & communication skills
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strategic planning capabilities
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Critical thinking abilities
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to mobilize key stakeholders and engage senior leadership
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Maintaining productive/collaborative relationships with internal and external business partners
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Negotiation and decision making skills
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Operating in a fast paced, high energy environment
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Enthusiasm and self-motivation
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Diverse leadership capabilities
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Influence and collaboration skills
Senior Product Manager, Access and Affordability Messaging & Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Development and coaching of others
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Track and measure marketing campaigns
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Leverage advanced analytics to optimize marketing expenditure
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Generate target lists and segments for marketing promotions
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Conduct marketing mix modeling to link campaigns to sales
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Provide strategic insights across key marketing platforms and channels
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Design and maintain marketing dashboards and reports
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Present findings and actionable insights to marketing leadership
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Support and design A/B tests for campaign effectiveness
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Ensure accuracy and consistency of marketing data
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Coordinate data governance with cross-functional teams
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Support data and tool procurement for marketing tech analytics
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
HCP marketing
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Consumer marketing
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Web analytics
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Biotech or diagnostics industry knowledge
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Understanding of physician focused platforms and consumer channels
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Data governance in marketing operations
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Marketing tech analytics stack
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
quantitative_skill
Proficiency in SQL
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
quantitative_skill
R statistical programming
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
quantitative_skill
Python programming
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
quantitative_skill
Tableau visualization
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
quantitative_skill
Power BI visualization
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
quantitative_skill
Google Analytics
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
quantitative_skill
Statistical analysis
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
quantitative_skill
Data visualization
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Strategic thinking
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Project management skills
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Interpersonal communication skills
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Ability to synthesize complex data sets
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Creating compelling narratives
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Offering strategic recommendations
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Adaptability to hybrid work model
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead corporate team in consumer engagement and data-focused performance marketing
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Collaborate with divisional marketing and corporate support groups for strategic evolution
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
React early and rapidly to consumer trends and market changes
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop consumer insights using data and automation
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Streamline marketing processes to increase sales
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Drive use of analytical framework to meet consumer needs
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Translate data insights into actionable marketing strategies
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Ensure imprints have tools and data for developing effective ad campaigns
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Optimize strategies and tactics through data analytics and KPI tracking
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Identify opportunities for marketing improvement
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop understanding of social media trends and retail platform algorithms
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Tailor messaging and campaigns to different reader demographics and interests
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Guide marketing teams on optimizing campaigns on online retail platforms
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Champion adoption of new digital marketing technologies
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
function_responsibility
Implement and drive use of new strategies and technologies across the organization
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
domain_industry
Senior marketing/consumer insights role in book publishing, media or adjacent industry
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
domain_industry
Data-driven marketing strategies in publishing
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
domain_industry
Online retail environments, especially Amazon
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
domain_industry
AI-driven and programmatic advertising in digital marketing
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
domain_industry
Understanding the voice of the consumer in book publishing
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
quantitative_skill
Analytics and data science application in marketing
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
quantitative_skill
CRM, digital advertising platforms, and SEO/SEM usage
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
quantitative_skill
Social media strategy implementation
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
quantitative_skill
Automated marketing process improvement
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
quantitative_skill
Interpreting complex data into KPIs and insights
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
qualitative_skill
Excellent communication and interpersonal skills
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to drive collaboration and influence at all organizational levels
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
qualitative_skill
Resourceful problem-solving ability
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
qualitative_skill
Capacity to investigate and implement new strategies
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong vision for innovative technology application
SVP of Consumer Insights, Marketing, and Analytics
qualitative_skill
Motivation and ability to bring together groups to drive change
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Develop and execute scalable marketing strategy
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Drive product adoption and lifecycle engagement
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Design and implement scalable marketing programs
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Oversee analytics, operations, and scaled marketing efforts
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Collaborate with Startups team for growth and brand affinity
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Provide actionable insights on customer behavior and marketing performance
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Lead performance measurement and reporting
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Build centralized dashboards and reporting tools
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Lead end-to-end operations for efficiency enhancement
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Establish and maintain KPIs and performance metrics
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Optimize operational processes
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Drive cross-functional alignment on business initiatives
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Build and lead a high-performing team
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Mentor and develop team members
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
function_responsibility
Champion a data-driven culture across the organization
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
domain_industry
Scaled Marketing
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
domain_industry
Product Led Growth (PLG)
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
domain_industry
SaaS and self-service models
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
domain_industry
Performance Marketing
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
domain_industry
SEO and Website Analytics
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
domain_industry
In-product marketing
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
quantitative_skill
Data-driven decision making
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
quantitative_skill
Analytics and reporting expertise
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
quantitative_skill
Tableau proficiency
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
quantitative_skill
SQL knowledge
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
quantitative_skill
Salesforce proficiency
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
quantitative_skill
Business intelligence platform expertise
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
qualitative_skill
Strategic leadership
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
qualitative_skill
Operational excellence
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
qualitative_skill
Cross-functional team management
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
qualitative_skill
Ability to drive strategy through data
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
qualitative_skill
Exceptional communication skills
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
qualitative_skill
Influential interpersonal skills
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
qualitative_skill
Analytical mindset
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
qualitative_skill
Results-focused approach
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
qualitative_skill
Innovation and continuous improvement fostering
Sr. Director, Scaled Marketing, Analytics, and Operations
qualitative_skill
Collaborative work ethic
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead a team of analysts to understand marketing lead generation
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Analyze marketing channels efficiency and effectiveness
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Optimize website and marketing touchpoints through A/B testing
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Generate actionable insights to shape user experience
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Balance participation in analytics projects with addressing data issues
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Nurture team's analytical and leadership capabilities
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Communicate technical concepts and data insights to stakeholders
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Execute large complex projects with multiple stakeholders
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Ensure accuracy and reliability of analytics processes
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Identify customer groups and calculate ROI
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Create insightful dashboards and analyze customer satisfaction
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Guide team through entire analytics lifecycle
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Define success metrics and craft analytics plans
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Partner with Manager of Data Engineering and Marketing leaders to build project roadmaps
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Contribute to data governance and analytics tools refinement
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Inspire teams to adopt data-driven approaches
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop skills as a people leader and analytics expert
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Collaborate with senior leadership
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Manage Marketing Analytics staff development and performance
Manager, Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Participate in occasional travel for in-person engagement
Manager, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Technology/SaaS environment experience
Manager, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Expertise in B2B analytics
Manager, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Understanding of data infrastructure principles
Manager, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Knowledge of data modeling principles
Manager, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Data governance practices
Manager, Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Remote work understanding in a corporate setting
Manager, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
SQL expert level skills
Manager, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Python intermediate proficiency
Manager, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib library usage
Manager, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Python scripting for automation and data ingestion
Manager, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Business intelligence tools proficiency (Looker, Tableau, PowerBI)
Manager, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
A/B testing execution and analysis
Manager, Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Dashboard creation and customer satisfaction analysis
Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Emerging people leadership
Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong analytical and project management skills
Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strategic thinking capability
Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Passion for empowering teams
Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Effective communication skills
Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to guide a team through ambiguity
Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Structured and guiding approach to analytics
Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Collaborative work with cross-functional teams
Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Inspiring leadership style
Manager, Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Adaptability to remote work culture
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Lead marketing analytics efforts
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Drive data-driven decision making across the marketing organization
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Develop and implement a comprehensive marketing analytics strategy
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Build and manage a high performing team of marketing analysts
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Deliver actionable insights to inform and optimize marketing efforts
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Support marketing goals with appropriate analysis
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Provide coaching and mentorship to analysts
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Foster a culture of testing and continuous learning and development
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Focus on key performance indicators (KPIs) and return on investment (ROI) measurement
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Design and execute marketing analytics frameworks and processes
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Collaborate with cross-functional teams to enhance data models, tools, and infrastructure
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Implement new methodologies for data collection, analysis, and reporting
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Stay up-to-date on marketing analytics trends and best practices
Director Marketing Analytics
function_responsibility
Promote data-driven marketing throughout the organization
Director Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing analytics methodologies
Director Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing attribution modeling
Director Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Marketing mix modeling
Director Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Subscription/SaaS analytics
Director Marketing Analytics
domain_industry
Understanding of Mar Tech platforms
Director Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
SQL proficiency
Director Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Expertise in Google Analytics
Director Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Expertise in Heap Analytics
Director Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Proficiency in Tableau
Director Marketing Analytics
quantitative_skill
Data collection, analysis, and visualization skills
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Excellent communication skills
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong presentation and storytelling skills
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to translate complex data into clear insights
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong analytical and problem-solving skills
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Collaborative and results-oriented attitude
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Strong work ethic
Director Marketing Analytics
qualitative_skill
Ability to manage multiple priorities effectively
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Track and measure marketing campaigns within the Screening Business Unit
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Leverage advanced analytics and insights to measure campaign performance
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Optimize marketing expenditure
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Generate target lists and segments for HCP and consumer promotions
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Conduct marketing mix modeling to link marketing campaigns to sales
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Evaluate and optimize marketing expenditure across multiple channels
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Provide strategic insights across key physician focused and consumer channels
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Monitor and measure web analytics using tools like Google Analytics
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Design and maintain intuitive dashboards and reports
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Present findings, trends, and actionable insights to marketing leadership
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Support existing A/B tests and design new tests for campaign effectiveness
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Ensure the accuracy and consistency of marketing data
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Coordinate with marketing operations, IT, and agencies for data governance
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
function_responsibility
Support the data and tool procurement and ingestion for marketing analytics stack
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Precision oncology company operations
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Cancer care continuum
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Healthcare marketing analytics
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Biotech or diagnostics industry knowledge
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Life sciences background
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Healthcare cost impact understanding
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Advanced stage and early stage cancer patient test marketing
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
domain_industry
Regulatory compliance understanding for healthcare data
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
quantitative_skill
Advanced analytics proficiency
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
quantitative_skill
Statistical and visualization tool expertise (SQL, R, Python, Tableau, Power BI)
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
quantitative_skill
Complex data set synthesis
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
quantitative_skill
Marketing mix modeling
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Strategic thinking
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Compelling narrative creation
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Strategic recommendations for business growth
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Project management skills
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Effective communication across organizational levels
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Ability to present to marketing leaders and CEO
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Interpersonal skills
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Adaptability to hybrid work model
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Office environment adaptability
Senior Marketing Analytics Manager
qualitative_skill
Commitment to providing reasonable accommodations for candidates with disabilities




KEYWORDS
Marketing (≈60)
Data (≈45)
Analytics (≈20)
Performance (≈20)
Reporting (≈15)
Campaign (≈15)
Analysis (≈15)
Insights (≈12)
Testing (≈12)
Channel (≈12)
Paid (≈12)
Media (≈10)
SQL (≈10)
Strategy (≈10)
Customer (≈20)
Budget (≈9)
Engagement (≈10)
Attribution (≈5)
Conversion (≈5)
Optimization (≈6)
Tableau (≈8)
Growth (≈6)
KPIs (≈8)
Experience (≈12)


PHRASES
Marketing analytics (≈15)
Marketing campaign (≈12)
A/B testing (≈10)
Paid media (≈8)
Channel performance (≈8)
Multivariate testing (≈5)
Customer acquisition (≈6)
Data-driven insights (≈6)
Marketing strategy (≈8)
Cross-functional team (≈4)
Media budgets (≈5)
Financial budget management (≈5)
Conversion rate (≈5)
Key performance indicators (≈5)
Growth and engagement (≈4)
SQL queries (≈4)
Lead scoring (≈2)
Predictive analytics (≈3)
Multi-touch attribution (≈3)
Stakeholder presentations (≈3)
Organic search (≈3)
Campaign performance (≈6)
Strategic decisions (≈3)
Segment our prospect (≈2)
Marketing mix modeling (≈2)


SKILLS
Advanced Excel
SQL proficiency (writing/optimizing queries)
Data analysis and interpretation
A/B and multivariate testing
Tableau (or similar BI tools like Looker, Power BI, Domo)
Marketing mix modeling (MMM)
Multi-touch attribution methods
Financial/budget management (forecasting, accounting principles)
Web analytics (Google Analytics, Adobe Analytics)
Statistical analysis (regression, hypothesis testing)
Python or R (for data analysis)
Collaboration and communication (cross-functional teams)
Presentation and storytelling with data
Project/time management (managing multiple priorities)
Marketing automation platforms (Marketo, Pardot, Salesforce Marketing Cloud, HubSpot)


FUNCTIONS
Lead cross-channel marketing campaign reporting
Conduct advanced data analysis to extract insights
Develop and track key performance indicators (KPIs)
Manage and reconcile marketing budgets and invoices
Perform A/B and multivariate testing (design frameworks, validate implementations)
Collaborate with agencies and internal teams (channel leads, product, engineering)
Present data-driven findings (stakeholder presentations, leadership updates)
Optimize marketing spend and ROI through data-driven recommendations
Segment audiences (behavior/demographics) for targeted campaigns
Maintain and improve data integrity (governance, accuracy, and cleaning)
Develop dashboards and reports (Tableau, Domo, Looker) for performance tracking
Partner with BI and data engineering to ensure robust analytics infrastructure
Implement multi-touch attribution models (and marketing mix modeling)
Analyze churn and retention (customer upsells, loyalty, ROI)
Manage conversion funnel analytics (from acquisition to retention)





metrics analysis
communication & reporting
adhoc investigations
data analysis & insights
reporting automation
communication & reporting




business analytics and intelligence
communication & reporting
strategic planning process
problem solving
executive/leadership reporting and presentations
communication & reporting
structured thinking
significant value
communication
communication & reporting
technical documentation
knowledge management environment
insights and recommendations
communication & reporting
business functions
global marketing efforts
world class team
management & collaboration
synthesis modeling
central bi team
cross-functional
management & collaboration
complex analysis
enterprise level analytics
team collaboration
management & collaboration
data processes
key business decisions
data analytics
data engineering & modeling
business trends
technical expertise
data gathering and manipulation
data engineering & modeling
ongoing reporting
marketing analytics team
mma/mta attribution models
marketing metrics & analytics
automated reporting dashboards
strategic internal initiatives
marketing measurement programs
marketing metrics & analytics
new marketing solutions
drive strategy
marketing measurement technology
marketing metrics & analytics
performance gaps opportunities
marketing initiatives
marketing measurement complexities
marketing metrics & analytics
areas improvement
relevant experience
marketing analytics
marketing metrics & analytics
business decisions
responsible designing building
marketing data
marketing metrics & analytics
business questions
developing measurement strategies
media measurement
marketing metrics & analytics
business stakeholders
demand trust transparency
metrics measurement strategy
marketing metrics & analytics
queries visualizations
useful reporting views
lifetime value (ltv)
marketing metrics & analytics


challenging problems
return-on-investment (roi)
marketing metrics & analytics


ad hoc investigations
cost-per-acquisition (cpa)
marketing metrics & analytics


best practices
customer acquisition cost (cac)
marketing metrics & analytics


analytical statistical rigor
scaling marketing
marketing strategy & growth


multiple teams
media marketing programs
marketing strategy & growth


multiple stakeholders partners
marketing strategy
marketing strategy & growth


improve processes
user acquisition, activation, and retention
marketing strategy & growth


individual team leaders
designing and measuring testing experiments
marketing strategy & growth


meaningful insight
customer centric organizations
marketing strategy & growth


large data sets
data infrastructure and integration
data engineering & operations


leading insights
etl
data engineering & modeling




data integrity
data engineering & modeling




designing, building, scaling, and maintaining
marketing metrics & analytics




sql
skills & utilities (functional)




























data analysis
analytics strategy
marketing analytics & analysis


marketing strategy insights
analytics strategy
marketing analytics & analysis


marketing performance reporting
analytics strategy
marketing analytics & analysis


campaign analysis
campaign & marketing analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


campaign attribution
campaign & marketing analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


marketing mix modeling
campaign & marketing analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


channel performance
campaign & marketing analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


segmentation analysis
campaign & marketing analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


multi-channel analysis
campaign & marketing analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


lead analysis
campaign & marketing analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


budget analysis
financial analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


revenue attribution
financial analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


cost-per-acquisition (cpa)
financial analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


predictive analytics
data science & advanced analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


descriptive analytics
data science & advanced analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


machine learning models
data science & advanced analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


forecasting techniques
data science & advanced analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


data visualization
reporting & visualization
marketing analytics & analysis


dashboard creation
reporting & visualization
marketing analytics & analysis


storytelling with data
reporting & visualization
marketing analytics & analysis


visualization tools
reporting & visualization
marketing analytics & analysis


business intelligence tools
technical skills
marketing analytics & analysis


sql and query writing
technical skills
marketing analytics & analysis


data warehousing
technical skills
marketing analytics & analysis


python/r programming
technical skills
marketing analytics & analysis


advanced excel
technical skills
marketing analytics & analysis


digital marketing tools
technical skills
marketing analytics & analysis


google analytics
technical skills
marketing analytics & analysis


marketing automation tools
technical skills
marketing analytics & analysis


performance dashboards
reporting & visualization
marketing analytics & analysis


marketing roi analysis
financial analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


customer experience analysis
customer insights
marketing analytics & analysis


customer retention analysis
customer insights
marketing analytics & analysis


experimentation strategies
campaign & marketing analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


customer lifetime value (clv)
financial analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


user behavior analysis
customer insights
marketing analytics & analysis


user journey mapping
customer insights
marketing analytics & analysis


predictive modeling
data science & advanced analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


funnel analysis
experimentation & testing
marketing analytics & analysis


digital marketing analytics
digital marketing
marketing analytics & analysis


cross-channel analysis
digital marketing
marketing analytics & analysis


customer retention metrics
customer analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


lead attribution
campaign analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


engagement metrics
campaign analysis
marketing analytics & analysis


experimentation strategy
experimentation & testing
marketing analytics & analysis


reporting & visualization
reporting & visualization
marketing analytics & analysis


data storytelling
reporting & visualization
marketing analytics & analysis


dashboard development
reporting & visualization
marketing analytics & analysis


data visualization tools
reporting & visualization
marketing analytics & analysis


adobe analytics
analytics tools
marketing analytics & analysis


power bi
analytics tools
marketing analytics & analysis


python for data analysis
technical skills
marketing analytics & analysis


r programming
technical skills
marketing analytics & analysis


bigquery
technical skills
marketing analytics & analysis


database management
technical skills
marketing analytics & analysis


marketing automation integration
marketing automation
marketing analytics & analysis


team collaboration
collaboration
marketing analytics & analysis


cross-functional communication
collaboration
marketing analytics & analysis


marketing analytics
analytics strategy
growth marketing


lifetime value (ltv)
growth metrics & kpis
growth marketing


funnel optimization
experimentation & testing
growth marketing


churn rate
growth metrics & kpis
growth marketing


product analytics
data analysis
growth marketing


behavioral analysis
data analysis
growth marketing


customer retention strategies
customer focus
growth marketing


acquisition channels
acquisition & channels
growth marketing


organic traffic growth
acquisition & channels
growth marketing


referral programs
acquisition & channels
growth marketing


personalization
customer focus
growth marketing


revenue growth
growth strategy
growth marketing


viral marketing
creative & acquisition strategies
growth marketing


creative testing
experimentation & testing
growth marketing


product adoption
product & customer focus
growth marketing


api integrations
technology & digital
growth marketing


vision & leadership
leadership & strategy
marketing manager


business growth
leadership & strategy
marketing manager


brand strategy
leadership & strategy
marketing manager


executive leadership
leadership & strategy
marketing manager


go-to-market strategy (gtm)
leadership & strategy
marketing manager


cross-functional leadership
leadership & strategy
marketing manager


market penetration
leadership & strategy
marketing manager


business development
leadership & strategy
marketing manager


people management
team & collaboration
marketing manager


coaching & mentoring
team & collaboration
marketing manager


talent development
team & collaboration
marketing manager


collaboration with sales
team & collaboration
marketing manager


inter-departmental coordination
team & collaboration
marketing manager


stakeholder engagement
team & collaboration
marketing manager


change management
team & collaboration
marketing manager


roi analysis
performance & measurement
marketing manager


kpi setting
performance & measurement
marketing manager


marketing roi
performance & measurement
marketing manager


marketing effectiveness
performance & measurement
marketing manager


market analysis
performance & measurement
marketing manager


financial forecasting
financial planning & operations
marketing manager


cost optimization
financial planning & operations
marketing manager


risk management
financial planning & operations
marketing manager


financial accountability
financial planning & operations
marketing manager


market trends
market insights & trends
marketing manager


industry expertise
market insights & trends
marketing manager


consumer behavior
market insights & trends
marketing manager


brand positioning
brand & content
marketing manager


brand building
brand & content
marketing manager


creative direction
brand & content
marketing manager


communications strategy
brand & content
marketing manager


digital transformation
digital & innovation
marketing manager


innovation & growth
digital & innovation
marketing manager


digital strategy
digital & innovation
marketing manager


technology integration
digital & innovation
marketing manager


product launch
product & customer focus
marketing manager


product strategy
product & customer focus
marketing manager


customer experience (cx)
product & customer focus
marketing manager


integrated marketing campaigns
campaigns & execution
marketing manager


acquisition & retention strategies
campaigns & execution
marketing manager


executive communication
communication & external relationships
marketing manager


public relations
communication & external relationships
marketing manager


external stakeholder management
communication & external relationships
marketing manager


crisis management
communication & external relationships
marketing manager


demand generation strategy
demand generation
demand generation manager


pipeline development
demand generation
demand generation manager


marketing qualified leads (mql)
demand generation
demand generation manager


account-based marketing (abm)
demand generation
demand generation manager


multi-channel campaigns
campaigns
demand generation manager


paid advertising
campaigns
demand generation manager


webinars
campaigns
demand generation manager


events and sponsorships
campaigns
demand generation manager


content syndication
campaigns
demand generation manager


content marketing
campaigns
demand generation manager


sales funnel
sales alignment
demand generation manager


lead nurturing
sales alignment
demand generation manager


sales enablement
sales alignment
demand generation manager


alignment with sales teams
sales alignment
demand generation manager


lead scoring
sales alignment
demand generation manager


crm integration
technical knowledge
demand generation manager


lead conversion metrics
metrics & analysis
demand generation manager


attribution modeling
metrics & analysis
demand generation manager


customer acquisition cost (cac)
metrics & analysis
demand generation manager


return on investment (roi)
metrics & analysis
demand generation manager


conversion rate optimization
metrics & analysis
demand generation manager


content development
creative skills
demand generation manager


brand messaging
creative skills
demand generation manager


retention strategies
customer focus
demand generation manager


account management
customer focus
demand generation manager


user acquisition strategy
acquisition strategy
demand generation manager


marketing strategy
marketing strategy
marketing manager


campaign planning
marketing strategy
marketing manager


market positioning
marketing strategy
marketing manager


content strategy
marketing strategy
marketing manager


demand generation
marketing strategy
marketing manager


digital marketing
campaigns & execution
marketing manager


event planning
campaigns & execution
marketing manager


marketing automation
campaigns & execution
marketing manager


brand awareness
campaigns & execution
marketing manager


cross-functional collaboration
collaboration
marketing manager


team leadership
collaboration
marketing manager


project management
collaboration
marketing manager


customer relationship management
customer focus
marketing manager


user engagement
customer focus
marketing manager


customer retention
customer focus
marketing manager


market performance monitoring
metrics & analysis
marketing manager


budget management
operations
marketing manager


resource allocation
operations
marketing manager


team coordination
operations
marketing manager


graphic design understanding
creative skills
marketing manager


brand consistency
creative skills
marketing manager


technical skills
technical knowledge
marketing manager


crm tools
technical knowledge
marketing manager


marketing automation software
technical knowledge
marketing manager


digital channels
technical knowledge
marketing manager


website strategy
web strategy
marketing manager


on-page optimization, onpage optimization
on-page seo
seo manager


off-page optimization, offpage optimization
off-page seo
seo manager


keyword research
seo strategy
seo manager


content optimization
on-page seo
seo manager


link building, backlink building
off-page seo
seo manager


backlink analysis
off-page seo
seo manager


competitor analysis
seo strategy
seo manager


seo audits
technical seo
seo manager


site architecture
technical seo
seo manager


crawlability
technical seo
seo manager


mobile seo
technical seo
seo manager


page speed optimization
technical seo
seo manager


core web vitals
technical seo
seo manager


schema markup
technical seo
seo manager


meta tags optimization
on-page seo
seo manager


google search console
analytics
seo manager


rank tracking
analytics
seo manager


digital marketing integration
collaboration
seo manager


algorithm updates
seo strategy
seo manager


market trends analysis
seo strategy
seo manager


strategic planning
leadership & strategy
seo manager


growth marketing
acquisition strategy
user acquisition manager


user growth
acquisition strategy
user acquisition manager


paid media
acquisition strategy
user acquisition manager


digital advertising
campaign management
user acquisition manager


campaign optimization
campaign management
user acquisition manager


conversion rate optimization (cro)
campaign management
user acquisition manager


user funnel analysis
campaign management
user acquisition manager


paid social
campaign management
user acquisition manager


display advertising
campaign management
user acquisition manager


programmatic advertising
campaign management
user acquisition manager


app install campaigns
campaign management
user acquisition manager


affiliate marketing
campaign management
user acquisition manager


user retargeting
campaign management
user acquisition manager


multi-channel marketing
campaign management
user acquisition manager


performance metrics
data & analysis
user acquisition manager


cohort analysis
data & analysis
user acquisition manager


retention analysis
data & analysis
user acquisition manager


user experience (ux)
customer focus
user acquisition manager


user feedback
customer focus
user acquisition manager


user retention strategies
customer focus
user acquisition manager


mobile marketing
technical skills
user acquisition manager


user insights
customer focus
user acquisition manager


customer feedback analysis
customer focus
user acquisition manager


app store optimization (aso)
technical skills
user acquisition manager


digital marketing strategy
web strategy
web marketing manager


website optimization
web strategy
web marketing manager


web content strategy
content & seo
web marketing manager


seo (search engine optimization)
content & seo
web marketing manager


content management system (cms)
content & seo
web marketing manager


web analytics
analytics
web marketing manager


traffic analysis
analytics
web marketing manager


landing page optimization
analytics
web marketing manager


website traffic growth
campaign management
web marketing manager


social media integration
campaign management
web marketing manager


website architecture
technical skills
web marketing manager


website management
technical skills
web marketing manager


web technologies
technical skills
web marketing manager


html/css
technical skills
web marketing manager


javascript basics
technical skills
web marketing manager


technical seo
technical skills
web marketing manager


visual design principles
creative skills
web marketing manager


heatmaps
analytics
web marketing manager


tag management
analytics
web marketing manager


marketing funnel analysis
analytics
web marketing manager


content calendar management
content & seo
web marketing manager


performance reporting
analytics
web marketing manager


app integration
technical skills
web marketing manager


seo strategy
seo strategy
web marketing manager


product-led growth
growth strategy
product growth manager


product market fit
growth strategy
product growth manager


growth experiments
growth strategy
product growth manager


user retention
user growth
product growth manager


activation metrics
user growth
product growth manager


user onboarding
user growth
product growth manager


churn analysis
user growth
product growth manager


alignment with product teams
collaboration
product growth manager


growth metrics
data & analysis
product growth manager


product analytics tools
data & analysis
product growth manager


voice of the customer
customer focus
product growth manager


product roadmap
product management
product growth manager


feature prioritization
product management
product growth manager


product experimentation
product management
product growth manager


api integration
technical skills
product growth manager


growth hacking
creative skills
product growth manager


market research
market research
product marketing manager


competitive analysis
market research
product marketing manager


customer insights
market research
product marketing manager


market segmentation
market research
product marketing manager


target audience
market research
product marketing manager


trend analysis
market research
product marketing manager


user personas
market research
product marketing manager


go-to-market strategy
product strategy
product marketing manager


product positioning
product strategy
product marketing manager


product differentiation
product strategy
product marketing manager


product lifecycle management
product strategy
product marketing manager


value proposition
product strategy
product marketing manager


market fit
product strategy
product marketing manager


marketing campaigns
campaigns & messaging
product marketing manager


messaging development
campaigns & messaging
product marketing manager


content creation
campaigns & messaging
product marketing manager


branding
campaigns & messaging
product marketing manager


storytelling
campaigns & messaging
product marketing manager


communication strategies
campaigns & messaging
product marketing manager


sales collateral
sales enablement
product marketing manager


sales training
sales enablement
product marketing manager


product demos
sales enablement
product marketing manager


lead generation
sales enablement
product marketing manager


sales support materials
sales enablement
product marketing manager


customer journey mapping
sales enablement
product marketing manager


seo/sem
digital marketing
product marketing manager


social media marketing
digital marketing
product marketing manager


email marketing
digital marketing
product marketing manager


ppc (pay-per-click)
digital marketing
product marketing manager


performance marketing
digital marketing
product marketing manager


analytics and reporting
digital marketing
product marketing manager


stakeholder management
cross-functional collaboration
product marketing manager


cross-functional teams
cross-functional collaboration
product marketing manager


alignment with product development
cross-functional collaboration
product marketing manager


coordination with sales
cross-functional collaboration
product marketing manager


product launch strategy
product launch
product marketing manager


launch plans
product launch
product marketing manager


feature release management
product launch
product marketing manager


timeline coordination
product launch
product marketing manager


marketing roadmap
product launch
product marketing manager


kpi tracking
metrics & analytics
product marketing manager


roi measurement
metrics & analytics
product marketing manager


customer acquisition
metrics & analytics
product marketing manager


retention metrics
metrics & analytics
product marketing manager


a/b testing
metrics & analytics
product marketing manager


data-driven decision-making
metrics & analytics
product marketing manager


customer experience
customer focus
product marketing manager


customer feedback
customer focus
product marketing manager


user testing
customer focus
product marketing manager


customer success stories
customer focus
product marketing manager


product adoption strategies
customer focus
product marketing manager


product knowledge
technical knowledge
product marketing manager


saas understanding
technical knowledge
product marketing manager


api familiarity
technical knowledge
product marketing manager


product development process
technical knowledge
product marketing manager


copywriting
creative skills
product marketing manager


visual design understanding
creative skills
product marketing manager


creative thinking
creative skills
product marketing manager


brand development
creative skills
product marketing manager


growth strategy
growth strategy
product marketing manager


hubspot
marketing automation
marketing tools & utilities


marketo
marketing automation
marketing tools & utilities


salesforce pardot
marketing automation
marketing tools & utilities


mailchimp
email marketing
marketing tools & utilities


activecampaign
email marketing
marketing tools & utilities


klaviyo
email marketing
marketing tools & utilities


google data studio
marketing analytics
marketing tools & utilities


tableau
marketing analytics
marketing tools & utilities


microsoft power bi
marketing analytics
marketing tools & utilities


semrush
seo & sem
marketing tools & utilities


ahrefs
seo & sem
marketing tools & utilities


moz
seo & sem
marketing tools & utilities


screaming frog
seo & sem
marketing tools & utilities


google keyword planner
seo & sem
marketing tools & utilities


yoast seo
seo & sem
marketing tools & utilities


brightedge
seo & sem
marketing tools & utilities


spyfu
seo & sem
marketing tools & utilities


google ads
sem & ppc
marketing tools & utilities


bing ads
sem & ppc
marketing tools & utilities


facebook ads manager
social media marketing
marketing tools & utilities


linkedin ads
social media marketing
marketing tools & utilities


twitter ads
social media marketing
marketing tools & utilities


instagram ads
social media marketing
marketing tools & utilities


hootsuite
social media marketing
marketing tools & utilities


buffer
social media marketing
marketing tools & utilities


sprout social
social media marketing
marketing tools & utilities


socialbee
social media marketing
marketing tools & utilities


clickmeter
affiliate marketing
marketing tools & utilities


post affiliate pro
affiliate marketing
marketing tools & utilities


cj affiliate
affiliate marketing
marketing tools & utilities


rakuten marketing
affiliate marketing
marketing tools & utilities


awin
affiliate marketing
marketing tools & utilities


referralcandy
affiliate marketing
marketing tools & utilities


buzzstream
branding & pr
marketing tools & utilities


muck rack
branding & pr
marketing tools & utilities


cision
branding & pr
marketing tools & utilities


pr newswire
branding & pr
marketing tools & utilities


haro (help a reporter out)
branding & pr
marketing tools & utilities


brand24
brand monitoring
marketing tools & utilities


mention
brand monitoring
marketing tools & utilities


brandwatch
brand monitoring
marketing tools & utilities


reputology
brand monitoring
marketing tools & utilities


canva
creative & design
marketing tools & utilities


adobe creative cloud
creative & design
marketing tools & utilities


figma
creative & design
marketing tools & utilities


sketch
creative & design
marketing tools & utilities


asana
project management
marketing tools & utilities


trello
project management
marketing tools & utilities


monday.com
project management
marketing tools & utilities


jira
project management
marketing tools & utilities


slack
communication
marketing tools & utilities


microsoft teams
communication
marketing tools & utilities


zoom
communication
marketing tools & utilities


zapier
workflow automation
marketing tools & utilities


google tag manager
marketing automation
marketing tools & utilities


optimizely
cro & experimentation
marketing tools & utilities


vwo (visual website optimizer)
cro & experimentation
marketing tools & utilities


hotjar
cro & experimentation
marketing tools & utilities


crazy egg
cro & experimentation
marketing tools & utilities


surveymonkey
customer feedback
marketing tools & utilities


qualtrics
customer feedback
marketing tools & utilities


typeform
customer feedback
marketing tools & utilities


slack integration
workflow automation
marketing tools & utilities


g suite
general productivity
marketing tools & utilities


microsoft office 365
general productivity
marketing tools & utilities


dropbox
file sharing & collaboration
marketing tools & utilities










































team; teams
decision; decisions




marketing;
initiative; initiatives




data;
base; based




business;
opportunity; opportunities




measure; measuring, measurement, measured
structure; structured




solution; solutions
service; services




drive; driving, driven
make; made




analytics;
automate; automated, automating




help; helping
problem; problems




support; supporting, supports
infrastructure;




strategy; strategies, strategic
efforts;




report; reporting, reports
advertising;




partner; partners, partnering
set; sets, setting




provide; provided, providing
offers; offer, offering, offered




develop; developing, developed, development
build; building, built




design; designing
consult; consulting, cosulted




programming;
recognize; recognized




lead; leading
understand; understanding




role; roles
model; models, modeling, modeled




lead; leading, leadership, led
plan; planning




media;
think; thinking, thought




analysis; analyses, analyzing, analyzed
request; requests




manage; managing, managed, manages
connect; connecting




action; actions
improve; improving, improvement, improves, improved




customer; customers
project; projects




skill; skills
individual; individuals




rnage; ranges, ranging
interact; interacts




position; positions
goal; goals




grow; growing, growth
insight; insights




process; processes
maintain; maintaining, maintenance




need; needs, requirements, require
impact; impacts




job; jobs
evolve; evolving, evolved




perform; performs, performing, performed
ad hoc;






identify; identifying, identified






knowledge;






























amazon advertising and e-commerce
domain_industry
design, build, and maintain data infrastructure
function_responsibility
digital advertising solutions
domain_industry
create automated reporting and dashboards
function_responsibility
marketing analytics for smbs
domain_industry
design and measure experiments
function_responsibility
data/bi space
domain_industry
execute complex analysis to support business functions
function_responsibility
knowledge of global marketing efforts
domain_industry
develop scaled, automated, user-friendly systems
function_responsibility
etl best practices
domain_industry
consult with cross-functional teams to develop kpis and automated reporting solutions
function_responsibility
marketing measurement technology knowledge
domain_industry
improve data infrastructure in collaboration with tech teams
function_responsibility
understanding of mmm (media mix modeling)
domain_industry
support central bi team in reporting on global marketing efforts
function_responsibility
understanding of mta (multi-touch attribution)
domain_industry
promote best practices in etl processes
function_responsibility
proficiency in media test design and analysis
domain_industry
mentor team members
function_responsibility
experience with large data set management
domain_industry
serve as liaison between business and product/science teams
function_responsibility
familiarity with web analytics data
domain_industry
perform ad hoc investigations into future improvements or innovations
function_responsibility
knowledge of digital marketing analytics software
domain_industry
lead and manage teams of marketing measurement experts
function_responsibility
ability to connect marketing data with business goals
domain_industry
develop measurement strategies for clients
function_responsibility




manage data processes for marketing measurement
function_responsibility




implement mmm and mta solutions
function_responsibility
ability to translate between data and business needs
qualitative_skill
lead testing and experimentation in marketing analytics
function_responsibility
communicating results to senior leadership
qualitative_skill
generate standard and ad hoc reporting
function_responsibility
analytical and statistical rigor in decision-making
qualitative_skill
perform analysis leading to insights and action
function_responsibility
operational excellence best practices
qualitative_skill
leverage proprietary tech and third-party tools for client needs
function_responsibility
data integrity and validation
qualitative_skill
collaborate with internal data science, client services, media activation, and product teams
function_responsibility
technical documentation skills
qualitative_skill
direct interaction with key client stakeholders across media, finance, and analytics
function_responsibility
problem-solving skills
qualitative_skill
drive internal strategic initiatives and problem solving
function_responsibility
communication of insights and recommendations
qualitative_skill
support business development and refine scopes of work
function_responsibility
excellent communication skills
qualitative_skill
communicate with executive leaders and stakeholders
function_responsibility
strong collaboration with multiple stakeholders
qualitative_skill




ability to thrive in ambiguous situations
qualitative_skill




action-oriented decision making
qualitative_skill




hunger for immediate action and quick decision making
qualitative_skill




structured problem-solving approach
qualitative_skill




cultural adaptability and ability to foster a supportive environment
qualitative_skill




sql with 5+ years of experience
quantitative_skill




programming for data extraction, transformation, and cleaning
quantitative_skill




scripting for automation in python or similar languages
quantitative_skill




advanced sql skills
quantitative_skill




statistical analytics
quantitative_skill




programming in r, python, ruby, or similar languages
quantitative_skill




experience with marketing industry analytics
quantitative_skill




data analysis and reporting
quantitative_skill




expertise in adobe analytics, google analytics, or similar tools
quantitative_skill






















written communication
linkedin_skills
competitive
linkedin_skills


reporting & analysis
linkedin_skills
marketing data analysis
linkedin_skills
analysis
linkedin_skills


analytics
linkedin_skills
online metrics
linkedin_skills
brand strategy
linkedin_skills


search engine optimization (seo)
linkedin_skills
marketing analytics
linkedin_skills
content strategy
linkedin_skills


data modeling
linkedin_skills
demand forecasting
linkedin_skills
affiliate management
linkedin_skills


online marketing
linkedin_skills
data analysis
linkedin_skills
pr
linkedin_skills


statistical data analysis
linkedin_skills
web analytics
linkedin_skills
content management
linkedin_skills


new trends
linkedin_skills
growth strategies
linkedin_skills
mobile marketing
linkedin_skills


team building
linkedin_skills
competitive analysis
linkedin_skills
search engine marketing
linkedin_skills


management & leadership - strategic thinking
linkedin_skills
team leadership
linkedin_skills
social media marketing
linkedin_skills


operations process improvement
linkedin_skills
web marketing strategy
linkedin_skills
email marketing
linkedin_skills


problem solving
linkedin_skills
paid search strategy
linkedin_skills
a/b testing
linkedin_skills


critical thinking
linkedin_skills
analytics
linkedin_skills
referral marketing
linkedin_skills


team mentoring
linkedin_skills
search engine optimization (seo)
linkedin_skills
search engine optimization (seo)
linkedin_skills


team leadership
linkedin_skills
predictive analytics
linkedin_skills
technical skills - aws
linkedin_skills


analytics engineering & management - customer acquisition cost (cac) optimization
linkedin_skills
data modeling
linkedin_skills
google cloud
linkedin_skills


kpi reports
linkedin_skills
online marketing
linkedin_skills
airflow
linkedin_skills


statistical modeling
linkedin_skills
attribution modeling
linkedin_skills
docker
linkedin_skills


data storytelling
linkedin_skills
statistical data analysis
linkedin_skills
jquery
linkedin_skills


etl
linkedin_skills
conversion optimization
linkedin_skills
s3
linkedin_skills


marketing reporting
linkedin_skills
a/b testing
linkedin_skills
sql
linkedin_skills


executive reporting
linkedin_skills
marketing data analysis
linkedin_skills
tableau
linkedin_skills


cross-functional initiatives
linkedin_skills
digital marketing
linkedin_skills
api
linkedin_skills


target audience
linkedin_skills
python
linkedin_skills
scikit-learn
linkedin_skills


performance dashboards
linkedin_skills
marketing analytics
linkedin_skills
react.js
linkedin_skills


data models
linkedin_skills
web analytics
linkedin_skills
angular
linkedin_skills


data mining
linkedin_skills
growth strategies
linkedin_skills
sqlite
linkedin_skills


funnel optimization
linkedin_skills
team leadership
linkedin_skills
pandas
linkedin_skills


audience segmentation
linkedin_skills
search advertising
linkedin_skills
numpy
linkedin_skills


lifetime value (ltv) modeling
linkedin_skills
sql
linkedin_skills
bash
linkedin_skills


machine learning
linkedin_skills
marketing strategy
linkedin_skills
bigquery
linkedin_skills


performance metrics
linkedin_skills
web strategy
linkedin_skills
css
linkedin_skills


customer journey analysis
linkedin_skills
content marketing
linkedin_skills
node.js
linkedin_skills


data processing
linkedin_skills
paid search strategy
linkedin_skills
html
linkedin_skills


channel mix optimization
linkedin_skills
search engine optimization (seo)
linkedin_skills
mongodb
linkedin_skills


data analysis
linkedin_skills
data modeling
linkedin_skills
amazon redshift
linkedin_skills


causal inference
linkedin_skills
online marketing
linkedin_skills
javascript
linkedin_skills


predictive modeling
linkedin_skills
statistical data analysis
linkedin_skills
mysql
linkedin_skills


regression analysis
linkedin_skills
conversion optimization
linkedin_skills
shell scripting
linkedin_skills


analytical modelling
linkedin_skills
a/b testing
linkedin_skills
python
linkedin_skills


conversation analysis
linkedin_skills
marketing analytics
linkedin_skills
tools & utilities - marketo
linkedin_skills


attribution modeling
linkedin_skills
data modeling
linkedin_skills
google ads
linkedin_skills


marketing analytics
linkedin_skills
statistical data analysis
linkedin_skills
meltwater
linkedin_skills


organic growth acquisition & performance marketing - marketing automation
linkedin_skills
written communication
linkedin_skills
semrush
linkedin_skills


content marketing
linkedin_skills
marketing data analysis
linkedin_skills
hubspot
linkedin_skills


marketing strategy
linkedin_skills
online metrics
linkedin_skills
optimizely
linkedin_skills


marketing leadership
linkedin_skills
marketing analytics
linkedin_skills
google search console
linkedin_skills


marketing mix
linkedin_skills
data analysis
linkedin_skills
google analytics
linkedin_skills


marketing budget management
linkedin_skills
web analytics
linkedin_skills
power bi
linkedin_skills


market research
linkedin_skills
growth strategies
linkedin_skills
screaming frog
linkedin_skills


conversion testing
linkedin_skills
team leadership
linkedin_skills
brightedge
linkedin_skills






web marketing strategy
linkedin_skills
facebook ads
linkedin_skills






python (programming language)
linkedin_skills
ahrefs
linkedin_skills











data analysis
market trends
data analytics
data visualization
marketing automation
analytics
market research
data integration
marketing analytics
communication
customer journey
quantitative analysis
sql
lead generation
data analysis
analytic skills
sales funnel
analytical capabilities
analyze marketing data
KPIs
digital analytics software google analytics adobe analytics
data collection and sorting
data governance
data visualization and reporting tools tableau power bi
marketing strategy
dashboarding
analytics tools
advanced data analytics
data storytelling
digital analytics
crm
cross-channel marketing
data visualization
forecasting
marketing analytics
tableau
google analytics
campaign analysis
marketing data platforms
industrial knowledge
data analysis
sql
problem solving
google analytics
business analysis
project management
digital marketing
ab testing
social media analytics
marketing strategy
statistics
statistics
customer insights
quantitative skills
analytical thinking
data-driven decision making
data management
analytics tools
SEO
marketing mix modeling
analyze and interpret data
PPC
data insights
attribution modeling
social media analytics
business insights
critical thinking
market research
campaign kpi analysis
digital marketing technology familiarity
KPI tracking
advanced analytics


conversion optimization
problem-solving


A/B testing
digital channels
keyword rankings
customer segmentation
data storytelling
keyword planning
business intelligence
python
keyword research tools
data visualization
marketing effectiveness
keyword tracking tools
predictive analytics
marketing attribution models
keyword gap analysis
marketing automation
predictive modeling
keyword search


r
keyword data
data analysis
data governance
keyword-based solutions
data visualization
stakeholder management
keyword-driven testing
data-driven insights
strategic planning
lead generation
data-driven decision making
keyword analysis
marketing analytics
customer analytics
keyword research
lead generation analysis
data-driven marketing
keyword strategy
lead generation campaigns
marketing strategies
keyword optimization
lead generation strategies
data insights
keyword tracking
lead management
marketing campaigns
keyword planner
lead tracking
dashboard reporting
keyword management
lead data analysis
data management
keyword insights
marketing strategy
customer insights
keyword development
marketing performance metrics
dashboard creation
keyword discovery
marketing analytics tools
customer experience


marketing analytics reporting
data strategy


marketing campaign analysis
customer journey mapping
marketing trends
marketing campaign performance
customer segmentation
marketing trends and techniques
marketing data analysis
data storytelling
marketing trends and data analysis
marketing data analytics
data governance
marketing trends understanding
lead analytics
data platforms
lead engine
lead acquisition
data tools
marketing mix modeling
marketing strategy development
marketing analytics
data analysis
marketing performance reporting
digital marketing
marketing strategies
marketing performance tracking
analytics
digital marketing
marketing strategy execution
data analysis
marketing campaigns
marketing data management
campaign management
data-driven decision making
lead management software
SEO strategies
analytics
lead attribution
marketing strategy
campaign performance
lead conversion
ecommerce
customer engagement
lead scoring
digital advertising
metrics reporting
lead funnel management
customer insights
kpi tracking
lead generation software
performance metrics
business intelligence
lead volume strategies
data-driven
market analysis
lead reporting
market research
consumer insights
lead forecasting
social media
reporting
lead quality measurement
content marketing
performance metrics
lead volume and quality tracking
CRM
data visualization
marketing tools
email marketing
predictive analytics
lead nurturing
Google Analytics
customer segmentation
lead distribution
A/B testing
competitive analysis
lead enrichment
data visualization
marketing analytics
lead scoring models
predictive analytics
data analysis
marketing technology
ROI analysis
Google Analytics
marketing technology stack
customer segmentation
campaign management
marketing technology tools
brand management
customer insights
marketing trends analysis
competitive analysis
digital marketing
marketing tools and analytics
business intelligence
A/B testing
marketing tools and platforms


data visualization


audience analysis
KPI tracking
communication skills
marketing strategy
predictive analytics
collaboration and teamwork
predictive analytics
business intelligence
collaborative
attribution modeling
consumer behavior
communication
audience targeting
strategic planning
collaborative skills
attribution models
reporting
communication and presentation skills
big data analytics
ROI analysis
collaborate
sql
SEO
collaboration and communication
attribution analysis
market research
collaborate with crossfunctional teams
consumer insights
SQL
content marketing
data analysis
CRM
consumer insights
digital marketing
cross-functional collaboration
content management
marketing campaigns
marketing analytics
content writing
campaign management
data analysis
content creation
google analytics
Google Analytics
consumer marketing
audience measurement
ROI analysis
consumer research
audience engagement
customer insights
communication strategy
brand marketing
campaign performance
cms reporting
brand management
predictive analytics
cms optimization
brand awareness
KPI measurement
communication tools
big data platforms
digital marketing
collaboration and stakeholder engagement
b2c marketing
market research
cms wordpress
b2b marketing
Tableau
collaborative environment
attribution strategy
SQL
cms tools wordpress
attribution reporting
business intelligence
communication strategies
audience strategy
Power BI
content management system
audience understanding
customer segmentation
content management systems
data visualization
data visualization
content optimization
brand strategy
A/B testing
consumer behavior analysis
social media analytics
Python
content performance analysis
performance analysis
R
cms publishing tools
tableau
competitive analysis
cms platform
power bi
social media analytics
cms or dam platform management
marketing analytics
social media marketing
cms platforms
campaign analysis
social media management
cms systems
campaign management
social media platforms
cms tools
campaign performance
social media content creation
cms website
web analytics
social media strategy
cms rules and regulations
marketing strategy
social media campaigns
cms requirements
data visualization
social media advertising
cms policy
business intelligence
social media engagement
cms programs
data analysis
social media analytics tools
data analytics
campaign analytics
social media analysis


client data analysis
social media content strategy
ability to write and present documentation
channel strategy
social media performance measurement
ability to write clear and concise reports
channel marketing
social media insights
able to work independently and as part of a team
channel analysis
social media tools
able to work both independently and in a teamoriented collaborative environment
campaign strategy
social media trends
ability to see past the numbers
campaign reporting
social media monitoring
ability to write effective reports and presentations
client relationship management
social media optimization
ability to write reports and procedure manuals
client engagement
social media reporting
ability to write excel functions
reporting tools
social media metrics
ability to write and edit professional presentations in a variety of multimedia formats
roi measurement
marketing analytics
ability to write and communicate clearly
sales analysis
data visualization
ability to write clearly and effectively
performance metrics
sql
able to handle multiple tasks
social media analytics
data analysis
able to draw conclusions
cloud data warehouse
predictive analytics
ability to write routine reports
cloud analytics
data-driven decision making
ability to write content in a variety of styles and tones
cloud platforms
business intelligence
ability to write code
content strategy
power bi
ability to write and design process maps


google analytics
ability to write and deliver training


tableau
ability to write policies and procedures


campaign analysis
ability to write correspondence


kpi tracking
ability to write for publication


customer insights
ability to write cyber investigative reports


reporting
ability to write professional correspondence


market research
ability to write simple correspondence


abm account based marketing
digital and direct marketing tactics


abm marketing
data analysis techniques


ability to write and publish analytical reports
google analytics


abm frameworks
marketing data ecosystem


able to independently prioritize work assignments meet deadlines and manage multiple projects
data extraction manipulation analytics


abm content strategy
marketing roi maximization


abm digital ad and reporting platforms
customer and market dynamics


abm campaigns
b2b purchase process


abm execution
data visualization approaches


abm programs
email marketing strategies


abm strategies
competitive analysis


abm strategy
pricing strategies


ability to write complex sql queries
market dynamics


ability to write sql
marketing and public relations


abm platforms
customer requirements


abm marketing campaigns
advertising


able to think critically and demonstrate logical reasoning





I. Core Skills:  	Marketing Analytics
	Data Analysis
	Data Analytics
	Web Analytics
	Business Intelligence
	Marketing Research
	Data Visualization
	Data Mining
	Statistical Analysis
	Predictive Analytics
	A/B Testing
	Data Storytelling
	Quantitative Analysis
	Data Modeling
	Marketing Attribution
	Customer Segmentation
	Customer Insights
	Marketing Automation
	Data-Driven Decision Making
	ROI Analysis
	
II. Technical Skills:  	SQL
	Python
	R
	SAS
	SPSS
	Excel (Advanced)
	Google Analytics
	Adobe Analytics
	Tableau
	Power BI
	Data Studio
	Google Tag Manager
	CRM (e.g., Salesforce, HubSpot)
	Marketing Automation Platforms (e.g., Marketo, Pardot)
	Data Warehousing
	ETL Processes
	Machine Learning (ML)
	Artificial Intelligence (AI)
	Big Data Technologies (e.g., Hadoop, Spark)
	Cloud Computing (e.g., AWS, Azure, GCP)
	
III. Marketing Channels & Strategies:  	Digital Marketing
	SEO/SEM
	Social Media Marketing
	Content Marketing
	Email Marketing
	Paid Advertising (PPC)
	Mobile Marketing
	Omnichannel Marketing
	Campaign Management
	Lead Generation
	Conversion Rate Optimization (CRO)
	Customer Lifetime Value (CLV)
	Customer Acquisition Cost (CAC)
	Brand Management
	Product Marketing
	Growth Hacking
	
IV. Soft Skills & Attributes:  	Communication Skills (written and verbal)
	Collaboration
	Problem-Solving
	Critical Thinking
	Strategic Thinking
	Project Management
	Presentation Skills
	Leadership
	Teamwork
	Time Management
	Detail-Oriented
	Results-Driven
	Analytical
	Creative
	Strategic
	Adaptable
	Proactive
	
V. Business Acumen:  	Business Strategy
	Market Analysis
	Competitive Analysis
	Forecasting
	Budget Management
	Strategic Planning
	Revenue Growth
	Profitability
	Customer Retention
	Market Share
	
I. Analytics Platforms & Tools:	Google Analytics
	Adobe Analytics
	Mixpanel
	Heap Analytics
	Kissmetrics
II. Data Visualization & Reporting:	Tableau
	Power BI
	Google Data Studio
	Whatagraph
III. Data Management & Warehousing:	SQL
	Python
	R
	AWS Redshift
	Snowflake
IV. Marketing Automation & CRM:	Marketo
	Pardot
	HubSpot
	Salesforce
V. Other Relevant Tools:	Google Tag Manager
	SEMrush
	Optimizely
1. Data Collection and Integration

1.1 Data Sources
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) systems
Web and App Analytics tools (e.g., Google Analytics, Adobe Analytics)
Advertising platforms (e.g., Google Ads, Facebook Ads)
Social media platforms (e.g., LinkedIn, Twitter, Instagram)
Email marketing tools (e.g., HubSpot, Mailchimp)
E-commerce platforms (e.g., Shopify, Magento)
Offline data sources (e.g., POS systems, surveys)
1.2 Data Integration
ETL (Extract, Transform, Load) processes
Data pipelines and APIs
Data warehouses and lakes (e.g., BigQuery, Snowflake)
Real-time data streaming (e.g., Kafka, Pub/Sub)

2. Data Processing and Storage

2.1 Data Cleaning and Preparation
Handling missing or inconsistent data
Data normalization and standardization
Deduplication and error handling
2.2 Storage and Management
Cloud storage (e.g., AWS S3, Google Cloud Storage)
Database systems (e.g., SQL, NoSQL databases)
Data governance and security


3. Marketing Performance Measurement

3.1 Metrics and KPIs
Traffic metrics (e.g., visits, unique users, bounce rate)
Conversion metrics (e.g., conversion rate, revenue per user)
Engagement metrics (e.g., click-through rate, time on site)
Retention metrics (e.g., churn rate, customer lifetime value)
3.2 Marketing Attribution
Single-touch attribution
Multi-touch attribution
Econometric modeling (e.g., Marketing Mix Models)



4. Analytics Techniques

4.1 Descriptive Analytics
Reporting dashboards
Historical trend analysis
4.2 Diagnostic Analytics
Root cause analysis
Funnel analysis
4.3 Predictive Analytics
Forecasting models (e.g., sales, demand)
Customer segmentation (e.g., clustering)
Lead scoring
4.4 Prescriptive Analytics
A/B testing and experimentation
Campaign optimization
Budget allocation models



5. Tools and Technologies

5.1 Visualization Tools
Tableau, Power BI, Looker
Dashboards (e.g., Data Studio)
5.2 Statistical and Programming Tools
Python, R, SQL
Statistical libraries (e.g., SciPy, Statsmodels)
5.3 Marketing-Specific Tools
Marketing automation platforms (e.g., Marketo, Pardot)
Data platforms (e.g., Datorama, Funnel.io)



6. Customer Insights and Behavior Analysis

6.1 Customer Segmentation
Demographic segmentation
Behavioral segmentation
Psychographic segmentation
6.2 Customer Journey Analysis
Path-to-purchase mapping
Drop-off and bottleneck analysis
6.3 Sentiment and Text Analysis
Social listening tools (e.g., Brandwatch)
Natural Language Processing (NLP)



7. Marketing Strategy and Optimization

7.1 Campaign Analysis
ROI measurement
Performance benchmarking
7.2 Channel Optimization
SEO/SEM performance
Email open/click analysis
Social media analytics
7.3 Personalization
Dynamic content strategies
Recommendation engines



8. Emerging Trends and Innovations

8.1 Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Predictive analytics using ML models
Chatbots and conversational analytics
8.2 Privacy and Compliance
GDPR, CCPA compliance
Cookieless tracking solutions
8.3 Real-Time Analytics
Dynamic bid adjustments in ads
Real-time customer insights
1. Data Collection and Integration Tools

1.1 Data Sources
Web Analytics:
Google Analytics 4
Adobe Analytics
Heap Analytics
Advertising Platforms:
Google Ads, Meta Ads (Facebook/Instagram), LinkedIn Ads
Programmatic platforms (e.g., The Trade Desk, DV360)
Social Media Analytics:
Hootsuite, Sprout Social, Brandwatch
Email Marketing:
Mailchimp, HubSpot, ActiveCampaign
E-commerce:
Shopify, Magento, WooCommerce
Surveys and Customer Feedback:
SurveyMonkey, Typeform, Qualtrics
1.2 Data Integration
ETL/ELT Tools:
Apache Airflow, Fivetran, Stitch
dbt (data build tool)
APIs:
Custom APIs for data extraction (e.g., Google Analytics API, Facebook Graph API)
Cloud Integration:
Zapier, Workato



2. Data Processing and Storage Tools

2.1 Data Preparation
Data Cleaning and Transformation:
Python (Pandas, NumPy), R (dplyr, tidyverse)
Alteryx, KNIME
2.2 Data Storage
Relational Databases:
PostgreSQL, MySQL, Microsoft SQL Server
Cloud Data Warehouses:
Google BigQuery, Snowflake, Amazon Redshift
Data Lakes:
Google Cloud Storage, Amazon S3
NoSQL Databases:
MongoDB, Firestore



3. Visualization and Reporting Tools

3.1 Dashboards
Tableau, Power BI, Google Data Studio (Looker Studio)
QlikView, Datorama
3.2 Embedded Reporting
Looker, Mode Analytics, Superset
3.3 Real-Time Monitoring
Klipfolio, Geckoboard



4. Analytics and Modeling Tools

4.1 Statistical Analysis
Programming Languages:
Python (Scikit-learn, Statsmodels)
R (caret, glm, nnet)
Advanced Analytics Platforms:
RapidMiner, SAS Analytics
4.2 Machine Learning and Predictive Modeling
Google Vertex AI, AWS SageMaker
TensorFlow, PyTorch
4.3 Marketing-Specific Analytics
Attribution Models:
Google Attribution, Adobe Attribution
Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM):
Marketing Evolution, Neustar



5. Marketing-Specific Platforms

5.1 SEO Tools
Ahrefs, SEMrush, Moz
Log analyzers (e.g., Screaming Frog, Botify)
5.2 Paid Media Tools
Campaign Management:
Smartly.io, Marin Software
Bid Management:
Skai (formerly Kenshoo), Google Ads Editor
5.3 CRM and Marketing Automation
Salesforce, HubSpot, Pardot
Marketo, ActiveCampaign
5.4 Social Media Tools
Content Management:
Buffer, Hootsuite
Social Listening:
Sprinklr, Brand24



6. Experimentation and Testing Tools

6.1 A/B Testing
Optimizely, Google Optimize (now deprecated)
VWO (Visual Website Optimizer), Adobe Target
6.2 Personalization
Dynamic Yield, Evergage



7. Workflow and Collaboration Tools

7.1 Project Management
Asana, Jira, Trello
7.2 Documentation
Confluence, Notion
7.3 Communication
Slack, Microsoft Teams
1. Analytics

Web Analytics
Website Traffic Analysis
Traffic Sources (Organic, Paid, Referral, Social)  
User Behavior (Bounce Rate, Time on Site, Pages per Session)  
Conversion Tracking (Goals, Events, Ecommerce)  
 
Marketing Campaign Analysis
Campaign Performance (Impressions, Clicks, Conversions, ROI)  
Channel Optimization (A/B Testing, Landing Page Optimization)  
Attribution Modeling (Multi-touch Attribution)  
 
Product Analytics
User Engagement (Feature Usage, Retention, Churn)  
Product Performance (Adoption, Feature Analysis)
Customer Journey Analysis (Funnel Analysis)  
 
Marketing Intelligence
Market Research (Trends, Competitive Analysis)  
Customer Insights (Segmentation, Profiling)  
Data Mining (Pattern Identification, Predictive Modeling)  
 

2. Marketing

Digital Marketing
Search Engine Optimization (SEO)
Keyword Research and Analysis  
On-Page Optimization (Content, Technical SEO)
Off-Page Optimization (Link Building)
 
Search Engine Marketing (SEM)
Paid Search Advertising (PPC)
Campaign Management (Bidding, Targeting)
Performance Tracking (Conversions, ROI)
 
Social Media Marketing
Platform Strategy (Content, Engagement)
Community Management
Social Listening and Analytics
 
 
Content Marketing
Content Strategy (Planning, Creation, Distribution)
Content Performance Analysis (Engagement, Reach)
SEO Content Optimization
 
Email Marketing
Campaign Management (Segmentation, Automation)
Email Performance Analysis (Open Rates, Click-through Rates)
A/B Testing and Optimization
 
Growth Hacking
Experimentation and Testing
Viral Marketing Strategies
Data-Driven Growth Optimization
 

3. Data Engineering

Data Warehousing
Data Modeling (Dimensional Modeling, Schema Design)  
ETL Processes (Extract, Transform, Load)  
Data Governance and Security  
 
Data Pipelines
Data Ingestion (Batch Processing, Real-time Streaming)  
Data Transformation (Cleaning, Aggregation)  
Data Validation and Quality Control
 
Big Data Technologies
Hadoop (HDFS, MapReduce)
Spark (Data Processing, Machine Learning)
NoSQL Databases (MongoDB, Cassandra)
 

4. Analysis

Data Analysis
Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
Data Cleaning and Preprocessing
Descriptive Statistics
 
Business Analysis
Market Analysis
Competitive Analysis
Customer Analysis (Segmentation, Lifetime Value)
 
Performance Analysis
Marketing Campaign Analysis
Website Traffic Analysis
Sales and Revenue Analysis

5. Statistics & Probability

Descriptive Statistics
Measures of Central Tendency (Mean, Median, Mode)  
Measures of Dispersion (Variance, Standard Deviation)  
Data Distributions (Normal Distribution, etc.)  
 
Inferential Statistics
Hypothesis Testing (t-tests, ANOVA)
Confidence Intervals
Regression Analysis
 
Probability
Probability Distributions (Binomial, Poisson, etc.)  
Conditional Probability  
Bayes' Theorem
 

6. Management & Leadership

Team Leadership
Mentoring and Coaching  
Performance Management  
Delegation and Empowerment  
 
Project Management
Planning and Organization  
Execution and Monitoring
Risk Management
 
Strategic Planning
Goal Setting and Alignment
Resource Allocation
Performance Tracking and Reporting

7. Technical Skills

Programming Languages
Python (Data Analysis, Machine Learning)  
R (Statistical Analysis, Visualization)  
SQL (Data Extraction and Manipulation)  
Data Management
Database Administration (SQL, NoSQL)
Data Warehousing (ETL, Data Modeling)
Cloud Computing (AWS, Azure, GCP)
Software Development
Version Control (Git)
Agile Methodologies

8. Soft Skills

Communication
Written Communication (Reports, Presentations)  
Verbal Communication (Meetings, Presentations)  
Data Storytelling  
 
Collaboration
Teamwork
Interpersonal Skills
Cross-functional Communication
 
Problem-Solving
Critical Thinking  
Analytical Thinking
Decision-Making
 

9. Tools & Software

Web Analytics Tools
Google Analytics  
Adobe Analytics  
Mixpanel
Data Visualization Tools
Tableau  
Power BI  
Google Data Studio
Marketing Automation Platforms
Marketo  
Pardot
HubSpot
CRM Systems
Salesforce  
Microsoft Dynamics
Other Tools
Excel (Advanced)  
Google Tag Manager  
SEMrush  
Optimizely
1. Data Analysis & Interpretation: This is the core of the role, encompassing skills related to collecting, cleaning, analyzing, and interpreting marketing data from various sources. This includes:

Data Extraction and Manipulation: Proficiency in extracting data from various sources like web analytics platforms (e.g., Google Analytics, Adobe Analytics), CRM systems, marketing automation tools, and databases using tools like SQL or programming languages like Python or R .  
Statistical Analysis: Applying statistical methods to analyze data, identify trends, and draw meaningful conclusions. This may involve techniques like regression analysis, hypothesis testing, and statistical modeling .  
Data Visualization: Creating clear and compelling visualizations (charts, dashboards, reports) to communicate insights and findings to stakeholders .  

2. Marketing Strategy & Campaign Optimization: This category focuses on applying analytical insights to improve marketing strategies and optimize campaigns. This includes:

Marketing Knowledge: A strong understanding of marketing principles, strategies, and channels (e.g., digital marketing, content marketing, social media marketing) .  
Campaign Performance Analysis: Measuring and analyzing the performance of marketing campaigns across different channels to identify areas for improvement and make data-driven recommendations for optimization .  
A/B Testing and Experimentation: Designing and conducting A/B tests to optimize marketing campaigns and improve conversion rates .  

3. Communication & Collaboration: Effectively communicating data-driven insights and collaborating with stakeholders are crucial for a Marketing Analytics Manager. This includes:

Data Storytelling: Presenting data findings in a clear and compelling way, translating complex data into actionable insights for non-technical audiences .  
Collaboration: Working effectively with cross-functional teams (e.g., marketing, sales, product development) to align data-driven insights with business goals and drive actions .  
Communication Skills: Excellent written and verbal communication skills to effectively convey information and collaborate with stakeholders .  

4. Tools & Technologies: A Marketing Analytics Manager needs to be proficient in various tools and technologies used for data analysis and marketing. This includes:

Web Analytics Platforms: Google Analytics, Adobe Analytics .  
Data Visualization Tools: Tableau, Google Data Studio .  
Marketing Automation Platforms: HubSpot, Marketo .  
CRM Systems: Salesforce, Microsoft Dynamics .  
Programming Languages: SQL, Python, R .  
Marketing analytics managers play a crucial role in today's data-driven business world. They are responsible for gathering, analyzing, and interpreting marketing data to optimize marketing strategies, improve customer acquisition and retention, and enhance overall marketing performance. This involves using software to gather data about user behavior and extract patterns, giving marketing teams insight into the customer base. This role requires a strong analytical mindset, expertise in marketing technologies, and the ability to transform data into actionable recommendations.

Core Job Functions

A marketing analytics manager's responsibilities can be diverse and vary depending on the size and structure of the organization. However, some core functions typically include:

Developing and Implementing Measurement Strategies: This involves defining key performance indicators (KPIs), setting measurement targets, and establishing tracking mechanisms to monitor the effectiveness of marketing campaigns across various channels (e.g., email, social media, search, website). It also includes measuring the performance and impact of marketing campaigns, programs, and channels. Through data and insights, marketing analytics managers partner with marketing leaders to establish performance benchmarks, campaign targets, and recommendations.  
Data Collection and Analysis: Gathering data from various sources, including web analytics platforms (e.g., Google Analytics), CRM systems, marketing automation tools, and social media platforms. This also includes cleaning, processing, and analyzing the data to identify trends, patterns, and insights.  
Reporting and Data Visualization: Creating reports and dashboards to track key metrics, visualize data trends, and communicate insights to stakeholders. This may involve using data visualization tools like Tableau or Google Data Studio to present findings in a clear and concise manner. Marketing analytics managers are also responsible for composing and presenting data stories to stakeholders, providing context and narrative to the data analysis.  
Marketing Campaign Optimization: Analyzing campaign performance data to identify areas for improvement and make recommendations for optimization. This may involve A/B testing, analyzing customer segmentation, and identifying opportunities to improve targeting and personalization. Marketing analytics managers conduct deep dives into the drivers of performance for marketing campaigns to understand the factors influencing their success or failure.  
Customer Insights and Segmentation: Analyzing customer data to understand customer behavior, preferences, and needs. This may involve developing customer segmentation strategies, identifying high-value customer groups, and providing insights to improve customer acquisition and retention efforts. Marketing analytics tools improve lead generation by providing the insights needed to optimize advertising efforts and target the most profitable consumers.  
Collaboration and Communication: Working closely with various teams, including marketing, sales, product development, and IT, to align data-driven insights with business goals and ensure that marketing campaigns are optimized for success. This includes planning the execution of optimization with internal staff and clients, taking into account essential site changes, content preparation, workflows, rules, tracking, and other program success-related requirements.  

Types of Marketing Analytics

Marketing analytics can be categorized into different types based on the purpose and approach of the analysis:

Descriptive Analytics: This type of analysis focuses on understanding past events and trends by summarizing historical data. It helps answer the question "What happened?" by providing insights into website traffic, campaign performance, and customer behavior. For example, a marketing analytics manager might use descriptive analytics to track website traffic sources, identify top-performing landing pages, or analyze the demographics of website visitors.  
Predictive Analytics: This type of analysis uses statistical techniques and machine learning to predict future outcomes based on historical data and trends. It helps answer the question "What might happen?" by forecasting future marketing performance, customer churn, or campaign ROI. For example, a marketing analytics manager might use predictive analytics to forecast sales based on seasonal trends, predict customer lifetime value, or identify potential risks to campaign success.  
Prescriptive Analytics: This type of analysis goes beyond predicting future outcomes and provides recommendations on what actions to take to achieve desired results. It helps answer the question "What should we do?" by suggesting optimal marketing strategies, resource allocation, and campaign optimization tactics. For example, a marketing analytics manager might use prescriptive analytics to recommend the best channels for reaching target audiences, optimize ad spending across different campaigns, or personalize customer experiences based on predicted preferences.  

Skills and Qualifications

To succeed in this role, a marketing analytics manager typically needs a combination of analytical skills, marketing knowledge, and technical expertise. Some essential skills and qualifications include:

Strong analytical and problem-solving skills.  
Deep understanding of marketing principles and strategies.  
Proficiency in data analysis tools and technologies (e.g., Excel, SQL, R, Python).  
Experience with web analytics platforms (e.g., Google Analytics, Adobe Analytics).  
Knowledge of data visualization tools (e.g., Tableau, Google Data Studio).  
Excellent communication and presentation skills, including the ability to tell compelling data stories.  
Ability to work independently and as part of a team.  
Ability to collaborate across functions and departments to drive required change and actions that drive growth.  
Bachelor's or Master's degree in marketing, statistics, or a related field.  
Knowledge of data management, data wrangling, and model deployment.  
Understanding of artificial intelligence (AI) tools and their applications in marketing analytics.  

Tools and Technologies

Marketing analytics managers utilize a variety of tools and technologies to perform their job functions. Some common ones include:

Web analytics tools: Google Analytics, Adobe Analytics, Matomo  
Data visualization tools: Tableau, Google Data Studio, Whatagraph  
Marketing automation platforms: HubSpot, Marketo  
CRM systems: Salesforce, Microsoft Dynamics  
Social media analytics tools: Sprout Social, Buffer  
SEO tools: SEMrush, Ahrefs  
Programming languages: SQL, Python, R
1. Analytical and Data Skills

Data Analysis: Proficiency in analyzing large datasets, identifying trends, patterns, and insights to inform marketing strategies.
Statistical Analysis: Knowledge of statistical methods and their application in marketing, including hypothesis testing, regression analysis, and statistical modeling.
Data Mining and Extraction: Ability to extract data from various sources, including web analytics platforms, CRM systems, marketing automation tools, and databases.
Data Visualization: Creating clear and compelling visualizations (charts, dashboards, reports) to communicate insights and findings to stakeholders.
Data Modeling: Building and using models to understand customer behavior, predict future outcomes, and optimize marketing campaigns.
Data Management: Understanding of data management principles and best practices for ensuring data quality and integrity.
Data Wrangling: Cleaning, transforming, and preparing data for analysis.

2. Marketing Expertise

Marketing Strategy: Deep understanding of marketing principles, strategies, and channels (e.g., digital marketing, content marketing, social media marketing).
Campaign Management: Experience in planning, executing, and analyzing marketing campaigns across different channels.
Customer Segmentation: Identifying and understanding different customer segments to tailor marketing messages and optimize targeting.
Marketing Automation: Knowledge of marketing automation tools and platforms (e.g., HubSpot, Marketo) to streamline marketing processes.
Customer Relationship Management (CRM): Familiarity with CRM systems (e.g., Salesforce) to track customer interactions and manage customer relationships.
A/B Testing and Experimentation: Designing and conducting A/B tests to optimize marketing campaigns and improve conversion rates.
Marketing Attribution: Understanding and applying attribution models to measure the effectiveness of different marketing touchpoints.

3. Technical Skills

Web Analytics Platforms: Proficiency in using web analytics platforms (e.g., Google Analytics, Adobe Analytics) to track website traffic and user behavior.
Data Visualization Tools: Expertise in using data visualization tools (e.g., Tableau, Google Data Studio) to create compelling data visualizations.
Programming Languages: Knowledge of programming languages like SQL, Python, or R for data extraction, manipulation, and analysis.
Microsoft Excel: Advanced Excel skills for data analysis and reporting.
Database Management: Basic understanding of database management concepts and tools.

4. Communication and Interpersonal Skills

Data Storytelling: Ability to effectively communicate data insights to stakeholders in a clear and compelling way, translating complex data into actionable insights for non-technical audiences.
Presentation Skills: Confidently presenting data findings and recommendations to various audiences.
Collaboration: Working effectively with cross-functional teams (e.g., marketing, sales, product development) to align data-driven insights with business goals and drive actions.
Communication Skills: Excellent written and verbal communication skills to effectively convey information and collaborate with stakeholders.

5. Business Acumen

Business Objectives: Understanding of business goals and how marketing analytics can contribute to achieving them.
Return on Investment (ROI): Measuring and analyzing the ROI of marketing campaigns and initiatives.
Strategic Thinking: Ability to think strategically and apply analytical insights to solve business problems.
Project Management: Managing marketing analytics projects effectively, including planning, execution, and reporting.
Marketing Analytics: A Multi-Level Categorized Breakdown

The field of marketing analytics can be viewed as a complex ecosystem, encompassing various methodologies, technologies, and applications. We can break it down using a three-level hierarchical approach:

Level 1: Core Domains (The "What" of Marketing Analytics)

This level defines the broad areas of focus within marketing analytics. Each domain represents a fundamental aspect of understanding and optimizing marketing performance.

1. Descriptive Analytics: What happened?
This domain focuses on understanding historical data to describe past performance. It involves summarizing, aggregating, and visualizing data to identify trends and patterns.
Examples: Website traffic reports, sales reports by region, social media engagement metrics, customer acquisition cost (CAC) over time.
2. Diagnostic Analytics: Why did it happen?
This domain delves deeper into the "why" behind observed trends. It aims to identify the factors that contributed to specific outcomes.
Examples: Analyzing customer churn to understand the reasons behind it, investigating the factors driving a decline in website conversions, identifying the most effective marketing channels for lead generation.
3. Predictive Analytics: What will happen?
This domain leverages historical data and statistical models to forecast future outcomes. It helps anticipate trends and make proactive decisions.
Examples: Predicting customer lifetime value (CLTV), forecasting future sales based on historical trends and seasonality, estimating the likelihood of customer churn.
4. Prescriptive Analytics: What should we do?
This is the most advanced domain, focusing on recommending actions to optimize outcomes based on predictions. It often involves optimization algorithms and simulation techniques.
Examples: Recommending optimal pricing strategies to maximize revenue, suggesting personalized marketing offers based on customer behavior, optimizing budget allocation across different marketing channels.

Level 2: Functional Areas (The "Where" of Marketing Analytics)

This level identifies the specific marketing functions and activities where analytics are applied. It reflects the practical application of the core domains.

1. Customer Analytics: Understanding and engaging customers.
Segmentation: Dividing customers into distinct groups based on shared characteristics (demographics, behavior, psychographics).
Churn Analysis: Identifying and preventing customer attrition.
Customer Lifetime Value (CLTV): Predicting the total revenue a customer will generate throughout their relationship with a business.
Sentiment Analysis: Analyzing customer feedback and opinions.
Customer Journey Mapping: Visualizing the steps a customer takes when interacting with a brand.
2. Channel Analytics: Optimizing performance across various marketing channels.
Web Analytics: Tracking and analyzing website traffic and user behavior.
Social Media Analytics: Measuring the effectiveness of social media campaigns.
Email Marketing Analytics: Evaluating the performance of email campaigns (open rates, click-through rates, conversions).
Search Engine Marketing (SEM) Analytics: Analyzing the performance of paid search campaigns.
Search Engine Optimization (SEO) Analytics: Analyzing the performance of organic search campaigns.
Mobile Analytics: Studying user behavior on mobile devices and apps.
3. Campaign Analytics: Measuring the effectiveness of marketing campaigns.
Attribution Modeling: Determining the contribution of each marketing touchpoint to a conversion.
A/B Testing: Comparing different versions of a marketing asset (e.g., website landing page, email subject line) to determine which performs best.
Return on Investment (ROI) Analysis: Evaluating the profitability of marketing campaigns.
Marketing Mix Modeling (MMM): Analyzing the impact of different marketing channels and activities on sales.
4. Product Analytics: Optimizing product development and strategy.
Usage Analytics: Tracking and analyzing how users interact with a product.
Feature Analysis: Evaluating the effectiveness and adoption of different product features.
Pricing Analysis: Determining the optimal price point for a product.
Market Basket Analysis: Identifying products that are frequently purchased together.

Level 3: Technical Enablers (The "How" of Marketing Analytics)

This level focuses on the tools, technologies, and methodologies that enable marketing analytics. These are the building blocks that power the insights derived in the higher levels.

1. Data Management and Integration:
Data Warehousing: Storing and managing large volumes of data from various sources.
Data Lakes: Storing raw data in its native format.
Customer Data Platforms (CDPs): Unified customer data for more targeted marketing.
ETL (Extract, Transform, Load): Processes for extracting data from different sources, transforming it into a usable format, and loading it into a data warehouse or other data store.
API Integration: Connecting different software systems to share data.
2. Statistical Methods and Modeling:
Regression Analysis: Modeling the relationship between variables.
Clustering: Grouping data points based on similarity.
Time Series Analysis: Analyzing data collected over time to identify trends and patterns.
Machine Learning: Using algorithms to learn from data and make predictions.
Deep Learning: A type of machine learning that uses artificial neural networks.
3. Visualization and Reporting:
Dashboards: Interactive displays of key performance indicators (KPIs).
Reporting Tools: Software for creating and sharing reports.
Data Storytelling: Communicating insights through compelling narratives.
Business Intelligence (BI) Tools: Platforms that integrate data analysis, visualization, and reporting. (e.g., Tableau, Power BI, Looker).
4. Cloud Computing and Big Data Technologies:
Cloud Platforms: On-demand computing resources (e.g., AWS, Azure, Google Cloud).
Big Data Technologies: Tools for processing and analyzing large, complex datasets (e.g., Hadoop, Spark).










DEMANG GEN






Demand generation strategy
Account-based marketing (ABM)
Pipeline growth/development
Marketing qualified leads (MQLs)
Revenue growth
Customer journey
Return on investment (ROI)
Cross-functional collaboration
Data-driven decision making
Lead nurturing
Marketing automation
Multi-channel marketing
Customer acquisition
Sales alignment
Campaign optimization
Marketing funnel
Brand awareness
Buyer's journey
Lead lifecycle
Performance metrics
Pipeline
Analytics
Conversion
Optimization
Integration
Strategy
Implementation
Attribution
Engagement
Personalization
Segmentation
Alignment
Scale
Growth
Innovation
Performance
Revenue
Retention
ROI
KPIs
Marketing automation platforms (Marketo, HubSpot, Salesforce)
Data analysis
Budget management
Campaign management
Project management
Strategic planning
Performance tracking
A/B testing
Lead scoring
Content strategy
Digital advertising
Email marketing
Social media marketing
SEO/SEM
CRM management
Analytics tools (Google Analytics, Tableau)
Reporting and visualization
Statistical analysis
SQL
Marketing operations
Develop and execute demand generation strategies
Design and manage multi-channel campaigns
Monitor and optimize campaign performance
Create and analyze performance reports
Manage marketing automation systems
Collaborate with sales teams
Lead cross-functional initiatives
Oversee budget allocation and optimization
Implement ABM strategies
Build and optimize lead nurturing programs
Track and report on KPIs
Develop content strategies
Manage vendor relationships
Create and optimize landing pages
Conduct market research and analysis
Optimize conversion rates
Manage digital advertising campaigns
Design email marketing campaigns
Coordinate with creative teams
Implement testing and optimization programs
MARKETING MANAGER, USER ACQUISITION






User acquisition strategy
Performance marketing
Campaign optimization
Digital marketing strategy
ROI/ROAS optimization
Customer acquisition
Growth marketing
Multi-channel marketing
Campaign performance
Data-driven marketing
Paid media strategy
Creative optimization
User lifecycle
Mobile marketing
Customer journey
Performance metrics
Budget management
Market penetration
Digital acquisition
Performance analysis
Mobile user acquisition
Performance marketing
Creative optimization
Campaign performance
User acquisition strategy
Player acquisition
Growth marketing
UA campaign management
Mobile gaming
App marketing
Performance metrics
Creative testing
User behavior
Monetization strategy
Real-time optimization
Audience targeting
Mobile measurement
User lifecycle
Campaign scaling
Cross-channel marketing
User acquisition strategy/UA strategy (47 mentions)
Performance marketing (41 mentions)
Campaign performance (38 mentions)
Creative optimization (35 mentions)
Mobile user acquisition (32 mentions)
Growth marketing (29 mentions)
Campaign management (28 mentions)
Data-driven optimization (26 mentions)
User behavior (24 mentions)
Creative testing (23 mentions)
Real-time optimization (21 mentions)
Cross-channel marketing (19 mentions)
Mobile gaming (18 mentions)
Performance metrics (17 mentions)
Audience targeting (16 mentions)
Mobile measurement (15 mentions)
Campaign scaling (14 mentions)
User lifecycle (13 mentions)
Monetization strategy (12 mentions)
App marketing (11 mentions)

Retention
ROI
KPIs
ROAS
CPI (Cost Per Install)
CTR
CVR
IPM (Installs Per Mille)
LTV
CAC
SKAN (SKAdNetwork)
MMP
ASO
UA
KPIs
CPM
CPA
D1/D7/D30 Retention
ARPU
ROI
CPP (Cost Per Purchase)
eCPM
Conversion
ROAS
CPM
CPC
CPA/CPI
CTR
CVR
IPM
LTV
Scale
Growth
Optimization
Attribution
Engagement
Performance
Testing
Analytics
Revenue


ROAS (52 mentions)
KPIs (48 mentions)
CPI (Cost Per Install) (45 mentions)
ROI (43 mentions)
CTR (41 mentions)
CVR (38 mentions)
CAC (35 mentions)
LTV (33 mentions)
CPM (31 mentions)
CPA (29 mentions)
UA (27 mentions)
IPM (25 mentions)
SKAN/SKAdNetwork (23 mentions)
MMP (21 mentions)
ASO (19 mentions)
D1/D7/D30 Retention (18 mentions)
ARPU (15 mentions)
eCPM (13 mentions)
CPP (11 mentions)
Conversion (10 mentions)



Paid social (Meta, TikTok, LinkedIn)
Google Ads/SEM
A/B testing
Data analysis
Budget management
Campaign management
Creative analysis
Performance tracking
Attribution modeling
Analytics tools
Marketing automation
Statistical analysis
SQL
Marketing analytics platforms
MMPs (Mobile Measurement Partners)
SKAdNetwork
Performance marketing tools
Excel/Data analysis
Tableau/visualization
CRM platforms
Meta Ads Platform
Google Ads
TikTok Ads
AppsFlyer/Adjust
Mobile attribution
A/B testing
Creative analysis
Budget management
Data analysis
Campaign management
ASO optimization
Performance tracking
Tableau/Data Studio
SQL
App store metrics
UA automation tools
Bidding strategies
Statistical analysis
Forecasting
User segmentation
Data analysis (56 mentions)
Campaign management (51 mentions)
Meta Ads Platform (48 mentions)
Creative analysis (45 mentions)
Budget management (43 mentions)
A/B testing (41 mentions)
TikTok Ads (39 mentions)
Google Ads (37 mentions)
Performance tracking (35 mentions)
Mobile attribution (33 mentions)
SQL (31 mentions)
User segmentation (29 mentions)
ASO optimization (27 mentions)
Bidding strategies (25 mentions)
AppsFlyer/Adjust (23 mentions)
Tableau/Data Studio (21 mentions)
Statistical analysis (19 mentions)
Forecasting (17 mentions)
UA automation tools (15 mentions)
App store metrics (13 mentions)
Design and execute UA campaigns
Optimize campaign performance
Manage marketing budgets
Analyze performance metrics
Scale successful campaigns
Develop testing strategies
Lead creative optimization
Monitor KPIs and ROAS
Create performance reports
Manage vendor relationships
Implement attribution tracking
Conduct market research
Drive user growth
Optimize user acquisition costs
Develop channel strategy
Coordinate with creative teams
Track competitive landscape
Build growth models
Forecast performance
Manage agency relationships
Scale UA campaigns
Optimize ad creatives
Manage UA budgets
Monitor KPIs/metrics
Develop testing frameworks
Analyze user behavior
Create performance reports
Optimize bidding strategies
Research market trends
Collaborate with creative team
Test new ad platforms
Forecast performance
Monitor competitor activity
Manage vendor relationships
Track attribution data
Scale successful campaigns
Build growth models
Analyze cohort data
Optimize user acquisition
Manage agency relationships
Scale UA campaigns (49 mentions)
Monitor KPIs/metrics (47 mentions)
Optimize ad creatives (45 mentions)
Manage UA budgets (43 mentions)
Analyze user behavior (41 mentions)
Develop testing frameworks (38 mentions)
Create performance reports (35 mentions)
Optimize bidding strategies (33 mentions)
Track attribution data (31 mentions)
Collaborate with creative team (29 mentions)


Scale successful campaigns (27 mentions)
Research market trends (25 mentions)
Forecast performance (23 mentions)
Monitor competitor activity (21 mentions)
Build growth models (19 mentions)
Analyze cohort data (17 mentions)
Test new ad platforms (15 mentions)
Manage vendor relationships (13 mentions)
Optimize user acquisition (11 mentions)
Manage agency relationships (9 mentions)



This frequency analysis reveals that the most commonly sought-after elements are:
Top 5 Overall Mentions:

Data analysis (56 mentions)
ROAS (52 mentions)
Campaign management (51 mentions)
Scale UA campaigns (49 mentions)
Meta Ads Platform (48 mentions)










GROWTH MARKETING






Marketing (98)
Growth (77)
Experience (50)
Drive (24)
Team (21)
Performance (19)
Paid (19)
Campaigns (19)
Product (18)
Data (18)
Strategies (17)
Lead (16)
Channels (14)
Skills (14)
Driven (14)
Revenue (13)
Development (12)
Analytics (11)
Digital (11)
Optimization (10)
Strategic (9)
Results (9)
Business (8)
Management (8)
ROI (8)
Testing (7)
Execution (7)
Leadership (7)
Metrics (7)
Innovation (6)
Growth marketing (28)
Paid media (19)
Data driven (14)
Performance marketing (12)
Growth strategy (11)
Demand generation (7)
Marketing automation (7)
Customer acquisition (6)
Cross functional teams (6)
Channel optimization (5)
Revenue growth (5)
Digital marketing (5)
Marketing analytics (4)
Google Ads (4)
Growth initiatives (4)
Conversion rate optimization (4)
Customer journey (4)
Lead generation (4)
Strategic planning (4)
Marketing campaigns (4)
Product marketing (3)
Team management (3)
Content strategy (3)
Data analysis (3)
Project management (3)
Brand awareness (3)
Growth metrics (3)
Marketing strategy (3)
ROI optimization (3)
Performance metrics (3)
Data analysis
Marketing automation
Campaign management
Analytics platforms
A/B testing
Performance marketing
Digital marketing
SEO/SEM
Social media marketing
Content marketing
Email marketing
CRM management
Budget management
Project management
Stakeholder management
Marketing analytics
Attribution modeling
Channel optimization
Growth strategy
Marketing operations
Strategy development
Team leadership
Campaign execution
Performance analysis
Budget management
Cross-functional collaboration
Stakeholder management
ROI optimization
Growth planning
Channel management
Marketing automation
Data analysis
Process improvement
Vendor management
Product marketing
Content strategy
Customer acquisition
Revenue optimization
Analytics reporting
Team development
DIGITAL CHANNELS:

Paid Media (6)
Email Marketing (5)
Google Ads (4)
Digital Marketing (4)
Social Media (3)
Paid Social (2)
SEO (2)
SEM (2)
Content Marketing (1)














MARKETING ANALYTICS






Marketing (397)
Data (274)
Analytics (243)
Experience (160)
Team (144)
Business (117)
Insights (100)
Performance (74)
Tools (58)
Growth (58)
Digital (57)
Analysis (50)
Leadership (49)
Reporting (44)
Strategic (43)
Strategy (40)
Technical (33)
Management (29)
Communication (29)
Development (28)
Marketing Analytics (80)
Data Driven (32)
Digital Marketing (25)
Cross Functional (21)
Data Science (17)
Marketing Team (16)
Marketing Performance (16)
Marketing Channels (16)
Marketing Strategy (13)
Business Intelligence (9)
Data Visualization (8)
Customer Journey (7)
Marketing Campaigns (6)
Project Management (5)
Machine Learning (4)
Executive Leadership (4)
Data Analysis (3)
Customer Experience (2)
Business Development (1)
Team Management (0)
SQL (25)
Tableau (15)
Python (14)
Statistics (13)
Google Analytics (13)
Adobe Analytics (11)
R (10)
Data Visualization (8)
Excel (7)
Snowflake (7)
SPSS (6)
SAS (5)
Looker (5)
Machine Learning (4)
A/B Testing (3)
Statistical Analysis (2)
PowerBI (1)
Data Modeling (1)
Database Management (0)
JavaScript (0)
Data Analytics Leadership & Management
Leading analytics teams
Setting analytics strategy
Managing stakeholder relationships
Developing team capabilities

Marketing Performance Analysis
Campaign optimization
ROI measurement
Channel performance analysis
Marketing mix modeling

Data Infrastructure & Technology
Marketing technology stack management
Data pipeline development
Tool implementation
System integration
Strategic Planning & Execution
Roadmap development
Goal setting and tracking
Resource allocation
Strategic initiative planning
Insight Development & Communication
Data storytelling
Executive presentations
Insight generation
Stakeholder communication
Testing & Experimentation
A/B testing
Multivariate testing


Test design and analysis
Performance measurement
Dashboard & Reporting
KPI development
Automated reporting
Visualization creation
Performance monitoring
Marketing Attribution
Multi-touch attribution
Channel attribution
Customer journey analysis
Attribution modeling


Cross-functional Collaboration
Partnership with marketing teams
Work with data engineering
Stakeholder management
Project coordination
Data Quality & Governance
Data accuracy validation
Process documentation
Standard setting
Quality control










MARKETING ANALYST






Marketing (374)
Data (240)
Business (152)
Experience (147)
Analytics (124)
Team (101)
Work (104)
Skills (77)
Digital (77)
Performance (77)
Job (83)
Across (79)
Role (69)
Including (75)
All (70)
Development (68)
Analysis (67)
Tools (65)
Strategy (63)
Campaigns (61)
Digital Marketing (36)
Experience with (39)
Ability to (60)
Marketing Analytics (32)
Data Analysis (28)
Performance Marketing (25)
Marketing Campaigns (22)
Marketing Strategy (20)
Customer Experience (18)
Business Intelligence (17)
Project Management (16)
Cross Functional Teams (15)
Campaign Performance (14)
Data Driven Decisions (13)
Marketing Programs (12)
Paid Media (12)
Team Leadership (11)
Marketing Automation (10)
Problem Solving Skills (10)
Strategic Planning (9)
Marketing (374)
Data Analysis (240)
Analytics (124)
Reporting (54)
Analysis (46)
Communication (25)
Leadership (23)
Adobe Suite (22)
SQL (17)
Collaboration (17)
Tableau (15)
Problem-solving (12)
Google Analytics (10)
Python (9)
Statistics (9)
CRM (9)
Data Visualization (8)
Excel (7)
Salesforce (7)
PowerBI (1)
Analytics and Data Analysis
Marketing Strategy Development
Campaign Management & Optimization
Performance Reporting & Measurement
Cross-functional Team Leadership
Digital Marketing Management
Data Visualization & Insights
Market Research & Analysis
Budget Management & ROI Optimization
Stakeholder Communication & Management
































ANALYTICS (B)






data (172)
analytics (106)
business (98)
team (81)
teams (53)
insights (46)
across (45)
marketing (41)
work (35)
drive (34)
strong (33)
product (32)
lead (30)
cross (29)
tools (29)
functional (28)
skills (27)
leadership (26)
stakeholders (25)
analysis (25)
you will (27)
cross functional (25)
data driven (20)
actionable insights (17)
across the (17)
collaborate with (16)
and data (16)
the team (15)
this role (14)
data science (13)
work with (13)
functional teams (12)
business intelligence (12)
data analytics (12)
analytics and (11)
the organization (11)
the business (11)
decision making (10)
fast paced (10)
self service (10)
SQL (18)
Tableau (16)
Python (10)
Looker (7)
Excel (6)
Snowflake (5)
DBT (5)
Mode (3)
PowerBI (2)
Spark (1)
Airflow (1)
Alteryx (1)
Databricks (1)
Data Analysis and Insights Generation
Team Leadership and Management
Stakeholder Management
Strategic Planning and Execution
Dashboard Development and Maintenance
Cross-functional Collaboration
Performance Metrics Definition
Data Governance
Process Optimization
Business Intelligence Development
Project Management
Mentoring and Team Development
Data Visualization
Requirements Gathering
Data Quality Management
Analytics Strategy Development
Experimentation and A/B Testing
Report Automation
Data-driven Decision Making
KPI Monitoring and Reporting








JOB TITLES






Manager, Marketing Analytics
Director Marketing Analytics, Organic Growth & Retention
Growth Marketing Analyst
Senior Product Analyst, SEO
Marketing Analytics Manager
Senior Marketing Analyst (Sales Development)
SEO Analyst II
Senior/Marketing Analyst
Data Scientist, Product Analytics
Web Analytics Manager
Senior Manager/Associate Director, Marketing Analytics
Senior Analyst, Marketing
Senior Analyst, Marketing Science & Analytics
Senior Data Analyst, Growth Acquisition
Head of Media Analytics, Discovery Tech
Sr. Associate, Product Analytics
Senior Data Analyst, Growth Acquisition
Growth Analytics Manager
Senior Manager- Marketing Analytics
Marketing Analytics Lead
Senior Marketing Analyst
Digital Marketing Data & Analytics Manager
Principal Analytics Architect, Marketing Intelligence
Associate Director, Marketing Analytics
Senior Analyst, Marketing Analytics & Insights
Senior Web Analyst



Manager, Data & Analytics
Sr Analyst, Marketing Technologies
Director of Data & Analytics
Senior Manager, Data and Analytics - Product
Staff Analyst, Product Analytics
Senior Data Analyst
Senior Data Analyst
Manager Data Analytics
Sr. Dir, Marketing Advanced Analytics
Data Analytics Lead
Manager, Digital Marketing Analytics
Manager, Business Intelligence & Marketing Analytics
Senior Data Analyst-Marketing
Marketing Data Analyst II
Director, Analytics
Marketing Operations Manager, Growth & Analytics
Sr. Marketing Analytics Manager, Veeqo
Marketing Intelligence Analyst
Marketing Analyst
Marketing Analytics Lead
Senior Digital Marketing Analyst
Lead, Marketing Analytics
Senior Marketing Analyst
Marketing Data Analyst
Senior Marketing Analyst
Sr Business Analyst, Marketing & Growth Strategy
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
Principal Web Analytics & Insights Manager
Senior Marketing Data Analyst
Senior Manager, Marketing Analytics
Marketing Analytics Team Lead
Advanced Analytics Manager
Sr. Analyst, Marketing Analytics
Marketing Analytics Lead - Data & Reporting
Sr Analyst, Marketing Insights & Analytics
AMER Marketing Strategy and Analytics Manager
Senior Data Scientist/Analyst
Sr. Analyst, Marketing Analytics and Solutions
Manager Analytics, Growth
Lead, Marketing Analytics
Manager, Product Analytics
Data Analyst
Web Strategist





